www.pwc.com
Integrity Inquiry
into the
functioning of the
Government of Sint
Maarten

Table of Contents
7.3.2. Observations and recommendations 72
7.4. Investigations and enforcement  91
7.4.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading practices 91
7.4.2. Observations and recommendations 92
7.5. Procurement  119
7.5.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading practices 119
7.5.2. Observations and recommendations 119
7.6. Transparency and strategic communications 125
7.6.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading practices 125
7.6.2. Observations and recommendations 126
7.7. Personnel management  133
7.7.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading practices 133
7.7.2. Observations and recommendations 134
7.8. Systems and information sharing  148
7.8.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading practices 148
7.8.2. Observations and recommendations 149
8. Assessment of the integrity architecture of state-owned companies 161
8.1. Governance and corporate structure  161
8.1.1. Princess Juliana International Airport Operating Company N.V. 161
8.1.2. N.V. Gemeenschappelijk Electriciteitsbedrijf Bovenwindse Eilanden 161
8.1.3. Sint Maarten Harbour Holding Company N.V. 162
8.1.4. Sint Maarten Telecommunication Holding Company N.V. 162
8.2. Methodology for assessment of state-owned companies 162
8.3. Commitment and devotion of resources 163
8.3.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading practices 163
8.3.2. Observations and recommendations 164
8.4. Integrity compliance programs  169
8.4.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading practices 169
8.4.2. Observations and recommendations 170
8.5. Procurement  174
8.5.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading practices 174
8.5.2. Observations and recommendations 175
8.6. Governance and oversight  178
8.6.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading practices 178

1. Introduction
On September 30, 2013, the Council of Ministers of the Kingdom of the Netherlands (“Kingdom”) by
Kingdom Decree charged the Governor of Sint Maarten with the responsibility to conduct an Integrity
Inquiry (“Inquiry”) to identify shortcomings and provide recommendations into the proper functioning of
the Government of Sint Maarten (“GoSM” or “Government”) as required in a democratic state governed by
the rule of law. The Kingdom Decree resulted from concerns of the Council of Ministers of the Kingdom
based upon media reports, public questions, perceptions about integrity and reputation, and perceptions
from reported integrity breaches by politicians in Sint Maarten.
The Governor of Sint Maarten (“Governor”), thereafter by Governor’s decision dated December 4, 2013,
established a three-person Steering Committee supported by a professional secretariat to allow for an
independent, impartial and effective process. The Steering Committee, Dr. Marten Oosting, Chairman, and
members Mr. Jaime Saleh and Mr. Miguel Alexander, have extensive backgrounds and careers in law,
public policy and good governance assessments across the Kingdom and former Netherlands Antilles. On
December 20, 2013, the Governor issued an Invitation to Tender to engage an international accounting
firm with experience and expertise in conducting forensic integrity inquiries to execute the assessment.
On February 21, 2014, PricewaterhouseCoopers (US) International LLC (“PwC”) was commissioned by the
Governor of Sint Maarten (“Client”) to perform an independent Inquiry into the GoSM. The scope of the
Inquiry extended to the programs and activities of the public administration sector including the
Government and State-owned Companies (“SoCs”). The period of the Inquiry was 24 weeks from the
commencement date of February 26, 2014, as defined in the contract and related documents (“Contract
Documents”).
Accordingly, our services were performed and this Inquiry Report (“Report”) was developed in accordance
with the Contract Documents dated February 21, 2014 and are subject to the terms and conditions included
therein.
Pursuant to our risk management policies, we are required to note that our services were performed in
accordance with the Standards for Consulting Services established by the American Institute of Certified
Public Accountants (“AICPA”). Accordingly, while we have rendered observations and recommendations in
this Report, we are not providing “audit services,” nor are we providing an “opinion” pursuant to the
AICPA’s Standards for Audit and Attest Services as we would, for example, if we were asked to perform an
audit of the financial statements of a publicly traded company. Accordingly, we did not “verify” or “audit”
any information provided to us pursuant to AICPA audit standards since this was a consulting engagement
– rather we accepted the material that we were provided by the various Government Ministries and
officials as authentic and accurate. We have noted in this Report when the information provided was not in
accordance or responsive to our requests. Finally, we are obliged to note, pursuant to the aforementioned
consulting standards, that our work is limited to the specific procedures and analysis described herein and
that we did not conduct procedures that are not specified in this Report. This Report is based only on the
information made available to us through August 1, 2014. Accordingly, changes in circumstances after this
date could affect the findings outlined in this Report.
In the course of the Inquiry, PwC gathered information through document requests and field research. The
services performed were carried out on the assumption that such information is accurate and complete.
PwC makes no representations with respect to the accuracy, authenticity or completeness of information
provided to us and cannot assume any responsibility for incomplete, inauthentic or inaccurate information.
We will, however, as indicated above, note in this Report if the information was not provided in accordance
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
5

2. Executive summary
2.1. Background
Sint Maarten obtained its status as an autonomous country within the Kingdom of the Netherlands on
October 10, 2010 (“10/10/10”). One of the early challenges facing the newly constituted Government of
Sint Maarten (“GoSM” or “Government”) was developing independent institutions that were capable of
administering to the domestic affairs of the country. This was not an easy task, and one made all the more
challenging by certain characteristics, such as limited human and financial resources, that are common in
small island communities such as Sint Maarten.
Communities where social, political, and economic ties develop over multiple generations pose a challenge
for establishing a system of good governance by the rule of law. In such environments, informal
relationship networks often govern how business and politics are conducted, and supersede formal rules
and procedures. The primacy of informal relationships allows those in positions of political and economic
power to use their networks to advance private interests at the expense of the public good.
Nearly four years have passed since the GoSM assumed responsibility for the domestic affairs of the island,
and progress towards establishing a system of governance grounded in the rule of law has been slow and
uneven. The country has witnessed a number of high profile allegations of public corruption in recent years
that, whether true or not, have cast a shadow over the real and substantial progress that it has made in
forming an autonomous government. Perhaps the most damaging examples that have surfaced include
allegations of corruption, conflicts of interest, and unethical conduct by Ministers and elected officials
whose conduct has undermined the perception of Government integrity.
The repeated nature of these allegations appears to have eroded public trust in the GoSM and highlights
the lack of accountability in public administration, as well as the difficulty that Government leaders have
encountered in addressing this problem. The visible lapses in public integrity that plague the GoSM have
raised considerable concern about the quality of governance in Sint Maarten, and have prompted a call for
an independent integrity assessment to benchmark existing policies, procedures, and practices against
global standards. Such integrity assessments are becoming increasingly common practice in the
international community as governments seek to improve their reputation and strengthen domestic
political support by demonstrating their commitment to aligning their public integrity framework with
internationally-recognized leading practices. This Report represents the culmination of an independent
assessment of Sint Maarten’s integrity architecture in accordance with global integrity standards and
leading practices.
2.2. Scope of the Integrity Inquiry
PricewaterhouseCoopers (US) International LLC (“PwC”) was commissioned by the Governor of Sint
Maarten, under the direction and guidance of an appointed Steering Committee, to conduct an
independent assessment of the integrity challenges facing Sint Maarten and develop recommendations for
strengthening the country’s integrity architecture. This Integrity Inquiry (“Inquiry”) commenced on
February 26, 2014 and was conducted over the course of 24 weeks, culminating in this Report. The
mandate associated with this Inquiry included permission to interview and obtain relevant documents
from officials in all seven Ministries in Sint Maarten. In addition, the Integrity Inquiry team (“Inquiry
team”) met with a variety of other stakeholders and concerned members of civil society. A particular focus
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
7

Inquiry team used the seven elements above to evaluate the GoSM’s current public integrity architecture,
including relevant laws, policies, procedures, and practices.
Grounded in the observations under each element, an overall “maturity finding” of “low,” “medium,” or
“high” was assigned based on the degree to which Sint Maarten’s laws, policies, procedures, and practices
aligned with the global benchmarks captured in each element:
Based on numerous observations included in this Report, and taking into consideration the individual
maturity findings in each element of the public integrity architecture assessment framework, the overall
integrity architecture maturity finding for Sint Maarten is considered to be “low.”
2.3.1. Government of Sint Maarten key observations
The governance challenges facing Sint Maarten are real and substantial. The Inquiry team noted significant
gaps in the integrity architecture of the GoSM related to each of the seven integrity elements underlying the
assessment. Two major observations noted by the Inquiry team are as follows:
 Low accountability due to inadequate enforcement of integrity-related laws, regulations, and policies
 Lack of preventative measures to avoid integrity breaches
Low accountability due to inadequate enforcement of integrity-related
laws, regulations, and policies
The central theme that emerged through the interviews and research conducted by the Inquiry team is that
Sint Maarten currently faces a substantial shortcoming in accountability that is largely attributable to a
lack of enforcement across a full spectrum of integrity-related laws, policies, and procedures.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
9

firsthand or members of civil society who may have been victimized. Citizens are not currently able to
submit complaints anonymously to an administrative reporting system, and reporting mechanisms and
protocols appear to be unclear. The lack of confidential reporting mechanisms hinders enforcement efforts
because instances of misconduct within the GoSM are less likely to be discovered without cooperation from
Government employees and public citizens.
The examples above illustrate areas where the GoSM’s commitment to public integrity was considered
weak, which has contributed to low levels of enforcement and a lack of accountability and do not account
for the scores of allegations and information provided to the Inquiry team across a range of integrity issues.
A number of other factors also contribute to the low levels of enforcement discovered by the Inquiry team,
including a lack of capacity, poor coordination among key Government functions, and low transparency,
which further undermine efforts to build a culture of public integrity.
Insufficient capacity
Key enforcement functions within the GoSM lack sufficient capacity to effectively carry out their mandate.
The National Detectives do not have enough personnel who possess the specialized forensic and financial
investigative expertise to handle integrity-related cases in an efficient manner (e.g., corruption, money-
laundering, etc.) In addition, the National Detectives claim that they do not have sufficient access to
equipment – including basic office supplies, which are essential to the operation of any modern
bureaucracy. The transient residency of Dutch prosecutors in Sint Maarten also raised concerns among
those interviewed by the Inquiry team since the short-term tours of duty currently served by prosecutors
are not conducive to developing strong working relationships with counterparts in the National Detectives
and Police. These short-term assignments also limit prosecutors’ understanding of the local culture, which
may influence enforcement priorities. Capacity constraints are also visible in immigration enforcement.
Illegal residents who are apprehended by immigration authorities are often released due to insufficient
detention facilities for holding detainees pending deportation. Fines are also not frequently levied on
businesses that employ illegal workers, rendering incentives to comply with immigration policies weak.
Poor coordination between enforcement functions
Poor coordination between key enforcement functions is a recurring theme that emerged through the
interviews and research conducted by the Inquiry team. With respect to criminal enforcement, the National
Detectives, Prosecutor’s Office, and the financial intelligence unit (“MOT”), the GoSM’s Financial
Intelligence Unit, all play critical roles in detecting, investigating, and punishing corruption and other
public integrity breaches. Yet a lack of coordination between these units has contributed to a dearth of anti-
corruption enforcement actions in Sint Maarten. Insufficient communication and coordination regarding
case management and workflow issues often hamper performance and outcomes. For example, the
National Detectives indicated that they have completed 80% of outstanding corruption investigations, and
that these files are ready for prosecution. The Prosecutor’s Office, however, indicated that many of these
supposedly closed investigations were not complete and could not be used to advance a prosecution. The
failure to coordinate - and communicate - in this instance could have created a situation where neither
institution was clearly responsible for a set of cases. The resulting lack of “ownership” could allow such
cases to languish in the system.
Lack of transparency
The Inquiry team identified a lack of transparency as another characteristic of the GoSM that is currently
undermining accountability. Information about enforcement actions, such as aggregate statistics on
investigations, prosecutions, and convictions are not readily accessible. While there is a National
Ordinance in place that provides for the reactive disclosure of administrative information in response to
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
11

particularly problematic in a small island where relationship networks are highly intertwined. Law
enforcement and prosecution officials are especially vulnerable to conflicts of interest since many
discretionary decisions, like whether to launch an investigation or pursue a prosecution, can be influenced
by personal interests and relationships. While the LMA does contain a provision on the exchange of gifts, a
lack of specificity limits the effectiveness of this policy, and many public officials expressed uncertainty
regarding threshold issues such as what constitutes a “gift.” Perhaps most troubling is the apparent lack of
effort on behalf of the Government to address fundamental gaps like the absence of a Government-wide
conflict of interest policy. Instituting such a policy should be a relatively easy regulatory task given the
plethora of available models based on international standards that have been developed with a clear global
consensus.
Inadequate information sharing and control framework
Poor information sharing as well as information automation between Government functions hinders the
GoSM’s ability to identify risks and prevent integrity breaches. An illustrative example can be found in the
control of illegal immigration. Poor coordination and information sharing between the Ministry of VSA, the
Ministry of TEZVT, and the Ministry of Justice undermine efforts to enforce immigration regulation
including in the commercial sex industry.
The control framework around key Government functions, such as public procurement, is also insufficient.
Public procurement is a major source of Government expenditure, and the lack of a National Decree
containing general measures detailing the specific procedures required to encourage fair competition and
ensure efficiency creates tremendous opportunity for waste, fraud, and abuse. Similarly, controls around
the application process for permits/licenses do not effectively prevent the improper use of discretion by
public officials to issue licenses to personal contacts. The lack of automation also leads to vulnerability for
facilitation payments to occur in exchange for expedited processing of permits/licenses.
2.3.2. Government of Sint Maarten priority recommendations
Building on the maturity findings for each element, the Inquiry team identified key priority
recommendations for the GoSM, which are sequentially represented as a roadmap for strengthening public
integrity in Sint Maarten. These recommendations are placed in a sequence as a guideline for
implementation. Some recommendations may be implemented out of sequence for reasons such as
budgeting and human resource availability. Recommendations that can be implemented should not be
delayed because others sequenced earlier cannot be implemented. In that regard, these recommendations
should be viewed with some flexibility as to sequencing.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
13

Phase I: Demonstrate commitment to accountability
Phase I should focus on the GoSM immediately demonstrating to the local population and international
stakeholders a commitment to accountability through:
 Improving public access to information
 Rapid enforcement of a backlog of existing disciplinary and criminal cases.
 Transforming the Integrity Bureau to become an independent body charged with preventing
integrity breaches within the GoSM and coordinating integrity activities across departments. The
Integrity Bureau should be monitored by an oversight committee who should hold the body
accountable to improving integrity and test progress of launched integrity initiatives.
 Instituting a Code of Conduct that all Government officials are bound by. The overriding
principle for a Code of Conduct is that GoSM employees and officials have a duty to protect the
public interest. They must, at all times, demonstrate and adhere to the highest standards of
ethics and professional conduct to maintain the public's confidence and trust.
 Implementing anonymous reporting provisions and clearly articulating reporting mechanisms to
the public and Government employees. Investigations around complaints filed should be
conducted immediately, followed by appropriate enforcement action.
 Instituting a gaming control board to demonstrate a commitment to the prevention and
detection of money laundering and organized crime. The gaming control board should be
responsible for providing financial oversight of the casinos.
1. Commit to demonstrating integrity at the highest levels of leadership and promoting
accountability for misconduct regardless of political standing. In order to
demonstrate this commitment, transform the existing integrity initiative into an
official “Fight Against Corruption” campaign focused on increasing enforcement
activities. As a first indication of commitment to fighting corruption, adhere to the
principles of UNCAC and publicly commit to the implementation of the principles
and procedures of UNCAC: The Government should make every effort to improve its public
perception and demonstrate its commitment to fighting corruption. The current campaign has not
been sufficient or effective. Once the Government declares its intention to pursue an integrity
initiative, it must follow up on its commitments and demonstrate progress. Bold statements
without concrete actions will undermine public trust.
2. Create and launch a strategic communications campaign around the Fight Against
Corruption to encourage public scrutiny and engage the public in monitoring
progress of Government commitments: Create a separate section on the GoSM website
dedicated to the Fight Against Corruption that allows for any information related to the initiative
to be easily accessible and transparent. Content should also be developed on customer rights and
responsibilities as well as the role of the private sector and civil society. Progress updates should be
well documented and published, and integrity PMO updates should be published. Enforcement
statistics on integrity breach cases should be published quarterly on the Fight Against Corruption
website as a way to measure progress on enforcement and to serve as a deterrent.
3. Increase transparency and public access to information to enhance accountability.
The following information from all Ministries should be published on the Fight
Against Corruption website:
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
15

The selection of commissioners should be based on clear profiles and appointment should be made
by National Decree.
7. Create an Integrity Project Management Office (“PMO”) to serve under the Council of
Ministers to implement the recommendations included within this Report: The PMO
function should be primarily staffed with senior officials with the requisite authority to institute
implementation efforts within the Ministries. The Integrity Bureau should convene Integrity PMO
meetings and should work with the PMO to create consistent implementation plans. It is
imperative that some members of the PMO be Government officials to facilitate access to
information and inter-ministerial cooperation. The Council of Ministers should ultimately be
responsible for driving the implementation of recommendations.
8. Establish a universal, cross-Ministerial, anonymous complaint hotline administered
by a third-party vendor. Clearly define reporting mechanisms within the
Government for civil servants to file complaints regarding suspected integrity
breaches. The Government should visibly support this complaint mechanism and
encourage the public and civil servants to report wrongdoings as active participants
in the Fight Against Corruption: Complainants should be able to file complaints about
integrity breaches of all kinds including allegations of waste and abuse, regardless of whether the
complainant is directly involved with the matter or not. This complaint mechanism should not be
administered by Government employees or entities - a third-party complaints handling service is
strongly recommended.
9. Administer timely disciplinary sanctions on employees who engage in integrity
breaches and prioritize closing out the backlog of existing cases and take appropriate
disciplinary action: Communicate and publicize sanctions, consistent with privacy laws, in
order to serve as a deterrent.
10. Establish an independent gaming board with a financial oversight mechanism for
casinos: This board should be staffed with financial and money laundering experts who have
experience identifying and investigating illicit economic activity. The GoSM should establish this
gaming control board aligned with leading practices and global standards from recognized leaders
in the gaming industry. The gaming board will not only help to reduce the risk of money
laundering but also identify the appropriate amount of revenue subject to taxes. The selection of
candidates for the gaming board should be based on clear profiles and appointment should be
made by National Decree.
Phase II: Strengthen preventative measures
Phase II should be comprised of reviewing the existing regulatory framework to:
 Address gaps in the regulatory framework by developing new regulations in line with global
integrity standards; and/or
 Amend existing regulation to clarify implementation procedures and sanctions for non-
compliance.
New and amended regulation should immediately be enforced by Ministries with support from the
commissioner overseeing administrative fact finding investigations of the Integrity Bureau, and the
National Detective and Prosecutor’s Office.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
17

useful starting point and accelerator for the development of Sint Maarten’s National Decree
containing general measures on Public Procurement.
 Create a National Decree outlining a Minister’s authority in lifting moratoriums,
and require all subsequent licenses to be awarded according to a queue.
12. Develop effective, interactive, and standardized integrity trainings across the
Government and mandate managers and senior leadership to attend all trainings:
Trainings should be organized by the Integrity Bureau – specifically the commissioner overseeing
education, advice, and training – and should be taught by experienced anti-corruption
practitioners (internal and external). Training should be focused on integrity-related policies,
detecting corruption, and consequences for integrity breaches within the Government. Trainings
should also cover hypothetical situations that Government officials could face and instruction on
how to handle these situations. All trainings administered should be followed by a test, and all
trainings should be auditable. Perform regular, specific integrity trainings for Ministers and
members of parliament; these trainings should also be mandated and followed with a test.
Individuals should be required to retake the test until it is passed.
Phase III: Increase enforcement capacity, improve institutional
framework, and introduce preventative controls to enable compliance
Phase III should focus on new resources, institutions, and systems to enhance compliance and
enforcement. The following should be prioritized:
 Law enforcement resources and training
 Corruption-focused task force for law enforcement
 Immigration control
 Commercial sex industry oversight
 Information sharing and automated systems
13. Establish a specialized Anti-Corruption/Organized Crime Task Force within the
Prosecutor’s Office: This task force should include the head of the National Detectives, Attorney
General, and Chief of Police and coordinate closely with the head of MOT. The primary objective of
this task force should be to facilitate closer relationships among the different law enforcement and
justice departments by serving as a coordinating body for anti-corruption investigations and
prosecutions.
14. Increase skilled staff in National Detectives in line with mandate provided by the
Minister of Justice: The limited availability of skilled forensic investigators within the National
Detectives poses a substantial challenge for law enforcement efforts. The Minister of Justice has
authorized additional hiring (up to 20 full-time staff), and the National Detectives should expedite
the search for qualified candidates, with a particular emphasis on recruiting personnel with strong
Dutch language skills and experience conducting financial investigations.
15. Improve training in specialized anti-corruption investigative techniques and other
enforcement areas: Specialized training should be offered to the National Detectives to improve
their capacity to conduct integrity-related enforcement activities. Such training could take the form
of ready-to-deploy training programs such as those offered by the Association of Certified Fraud
Examiners and similar credentialing bodies, or customized trainings that include basic anti-
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
19

2.4. State-owned companies integrity architecture
The following graphic outlines the five elements constituting the SoC integrity architecture assessment
framework used by the Inquiry team:
Each element is designed to aggregate a wide range of leading practices distilled from global standards
such as OECD’s Principles for Corporate Governance and Transparency International’s Transparency of
State-owned Enterprises, among other relevant benchmarks. The Inquiry team used the five elements
above to evaluate the SoCs’ current integrity compliance and governance framework.
Grounded in the observations under each element, a “maturity finding” of “low,” “medium,” or “high” was
assigned based on the sophistication of the SoCs integrity compliance programs, policies, procedures, and
practices in relation to the global benchmarks captured in each element:
Based on observations included in this Report and taking into consideration the individual maturity
findings in each element of the integrity architecture assessment framework, the overall integrity
architecture maturity finding for the four SoCs assessed is “low.”
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
21

Lack of effective integrity compliance programs
Based on the analysis conducted, the SoCs do not adequately implement many of the elements required for
a well-functioning integrity compliance program. The establishment and implementation of these elements
is the responsibility of senior management and the Supervisory Board of Directors, and the program’s
6
success will require buy-in at all levels of the company. Missing components included, but were not
limited to, Codes of Conduct, anti-corruption policies, and adequate and documented procurement,
payment and whistleblower policies. A Code of Conduct for all personnel, as an example, is a critical and
fundamental element of an integrity compliance program as it mandates employees to operate in an ethical
manner, and imposes consequences for deviations from the requirements set forth within. It is noted that
several of the SoCs do possess a few of these elements, while others appeared to be in the process of
implementing additional measures. However, overall program implementation progress appeared to be
low.
The Inquiry team met with senior officials from each SoC, and the majority of these individuals reported to
the Inquiry team that each entity has adopted a strong stance against corruption. However, the Inquiry
team did not observe a visible commitment to integrity in terms of frequent communications to staff,
devotion of resources to ethics, and established anti-corruption policies. The success of an integrity
program depends on strong and visible support from the Supervisory Board of Directors and company
management who need to establish a proper “tone at the top” that unambiguously expresses the
7
organization’s rejection of corrupt behavior and commitment to punishing misconduct.
Overall lack of transparency to SoC stakeholders
The SoCs are largely not transparent to their stakeholders, including the GoSM, third parties, and the
general public. Only one SoC was observed to disclose its financial results and company objectives in an
annual report posted on the entity’s website. The Inquiry team was unable to locate disclosures of financial
results, company objectives or other recommended reporting requirements such as remuneration of
executive management and Supervisory Board members, related party transactions, risk factors, and
8
commitment to an effective anti-corruption compliance program from any of the other SoCs. Limited
disclosures by SoCs can give rise to a public perception of corruption, as was observed in Sint Maarten
through interviews and research of open sources. Interviewees frequently noted the lack of disclosure of
several large infrastructure projects completed by the SoCs, mainly related to bidding and award
procedures. Limited reporting decreases accountability of SoCs to their stakeholders, and contributes to
the perception of corruption among the organizations.
2.4.2. State-owned companies priority recommendations
Building on the maturity findings for each element, the Inquiry team identified key priority
recommendations for SoCs, which are sequentially represented as a roadmap for strengthening public
integrity in Sint Maarten. These recommendations are placed in a sequence as a guideline for
implementation. Some recommendations may be implemented out of sequence for reasons such as
budgeting and human resource availability. Recommendations that can be implemented should not be
6
ICC Rules on Combating Corruption, International Chamber of Commerce; http://www.iccwbo.org/Advocacy-Codes-and-
Rules/Document-centre/2011/ICC-Rules-on-Combating-Corruption/
7
Id.
8
Transparency of State-owned Enterprises, Transparency International,
http://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/answer/transparency_of_state_owned_enterprises
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
23

Phase I: Enhance regulatory and corporate governance compliance to
increase accountability
Phase I should focus on enhancing compliance with the GoSM’s existing regulatory and corporate
governance framework in order to improve the public perception of integrity and increase accountability
of the SoCs to both local and international stakeholders. The following should be prioritized:
 The GoSM asserting itself in its role as owner of each SoC
 SoC compliance with regulatory requirements for private companies
 SoC compliance with corporate governance legal requirements
 Visible initiative to enforce the current corporate governance framework
1. The GoSM should assert itself as sole shareholder and enforce SoC compliance with
laws governing private companies: It appeared during the Inquiry that some SoCs operate
with no accountability to their sole shareholder, the GoSM. The GoSM should assert itself as the
sole owner of the SoCs and demand that they comply with all regulatory and governance laws, as
well as requests for information from inquiries, investigations, and other Government-sanctioned
initiatives. The SoCs are limited liability companies (“N.V.”) and therefore the GoSM should ensure
that they abide by the same rules and regulations as other private companies, including those
governing competition, taxes and permits.
2. Implement and enforce corporate governance rules: The GoSM should enforce, and each
SoC should implement, Sint Maarten’s corporate governance requirements for SoCs set forth
within the Corporate Governance Code. A key piece to governance compliance is the required
interaction between the SoCs and the CGC. The GoSM should ensure that the CGC is adequately
supported and provided the necessary resources to effectively carry out its mandate. Amendments
should also be made to the Corporate Governance Code to explicitly state that the Code also applies
to wholly owned subsidiaries of the SoCs.
3. Independence of SoC Supervisory Boards of Directors should be required: The
Supervisory Boards of all SoCs should be free of GoSM officials to allow boards to exercise
judgment without Government influence. Promoting Supervisory Board independence will also
help reduce public perception of the GoSM’s influence on SoC operations. The Civil Code articles
2:139 through 2:144 contain guidelines to enhance Supervisory Board independence which should
be considered by each SoC and enforced by the GoSM. Independence of the Supervisory Boards of
Directors would be strengthened if these Boards were qualified as Independent Boards in
accordance with the articles stated above which contain measures, for example, on the minimum
9
amount of Directors, length of appointments, voting, and suspension and termination.
4. Transfer SLAC’s regulatory functions back to Government: A complete separation of
ownership and market regulation responsibilities is required to create a level playing field for SoCs
and the private sector. SoCs should not be regulating the industries in which they also compete.
5. Mandate SoCs to formulate profiles for Supervisory Boards of Directors: The GoSM
should require the SoCs to formulate, review and approve profiles in accordance with the National
Ordinance Corporate Governance for positions on the Supervisory Board of Directors through a
9
Burgerlijk Wetboek
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
25

A risk assessment should be conducted on those claims to determine the parameters (e.g., timing,
team composition, locations of relevant information, etc.) of investigation. Investigative teams,
based on parameters identified by the Executive Committee, should prepare an investigative plan,
consistent with leading practices, and perform the investigation. Action taken against employees as
a result of the complaints filed should be publicized internally, consistent with privacy laws, to
serve as a deterrent. All allegations should be tracked, and periodic reporting of allegations and
their disposition should be escalated to the Supervisory Board of Directors.
9. Establish standardized procurement guidelines in line with leading standards: The
GoSM should consider the establishment of standardized procurement guidelines that each SoC
can adapt and tailor to their specific needs. The guidelines should provide an objective assessment
of bid documents and vendor selection. Each SoC should clearly document their own procurement
policies and procedures to increase accountability and make it difficult for staff to deviate from
these policies and procedures.
10. Establish strict and explicit expense policies at SoCs: SoCs should adjust their expense
policies and procedures to prohibit employees, management and Supervisory Board members from
receiving meals on top of their daily allowance. Expense policies should also govern ethical
entertainment expenses, especially considering that these companies are owned by the GoSM. SoC
staff should, in general, avoid lavish expenditures using Government funds.
11. Establish an internal mechanism to prevent duplicate expenses and for personnel to
repay unused allowances: Policies and procedures should be updated to include an analysis of
the business purposes of company travel to determine whether employees require daily cash
allowances. In instances where allowances are not required (i.e. for a board meeting during which
meals will be provided) cash allowances should be reduced or eliminated. Each SoC should also
establish an internal mechanism for staff to pay back unused daily cash allowances.
Phase III: Increase transparency and ensure continued compliance
through internal audit and independent assessments
Phase III should focus on the disclosure of important information by SoCs to their stakeholders,
including the Government, the general public and the international community. The following should be
prioritized:
 Institution of a transparency and reporting program for each SoC
 Continued compliance through SoCs’ internal audit functions
 Periodic external assessments completed by an independent third party
12. Require SoCs to make disclosures: SoCs should have reporting requirements in order to
increase accountability to stakeholders, including the GoSM and the general public. SoCs should be
required to disclose financial and operating results; company objectives, regarding their
commercial activities as well as environmental and social policies; remuneration policy for the
management board and supervisory boards of directors; selection processes, qualifications and
independence of supervisory board members; identified risks; and governance structure and
policies. The websites of the SoCs should be utilized to centralize and disclose information to its
stakeholders including, but not limited to, financial results, codes of conduct, annual reports, and
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
27

3. Report structure
This Report is structured to provide both summary analysis and detailed observations and
recommendations based on the Inquiry of the GoSM. Section 4, Scope and approach, discusses in detail
the team’s scope and approach to this Inquiry including highlighting global standards and leading practices
that served as a foundation for the Inquiry and were relied upon by the team in comparing the GoSM’s
progress against accepted practices in the global community. Also included is information related to the
desk and field research conducted, as well as outlining any obstacles the team experienced during the
course of the Inquiry.
Section 5, Definition of integrity, sets forth descriptions of rule of law and good governance. Of course,
when analyzing any country against international standards and leading practices, there needs to be keen
understanding of the political, constitutional, social, economic and cultural norms of a country; that Local
context is described in section 6.
The main body of this Report includes the Assessment of the integrity architecture of the
Government of Sint Maarten contained in section 7, structured to align our observations and
recommendations in conformity with governance and integrity practices against a thorough public integrity
framework which includes the following seven elements: leadership, commitment, and devotion of
resources; regulatory framework; investigations and enforcement; procurement; transparency and
strategic communications; personnel management; and systems and information sharing. In section 7 the
global standards and leading practices within each element are described so that readers will understand
the foundation for discussing and analyzing the GoSM’s progress against the integrity framework. With
those particular governance principles in mind, section 7 of the Report is structured to address each
element and identify particular examples and observations that were discovered to pose potential integrity
risks. At the end of each observation, our Report sets forth recommendations tailored to the environment
in Sint Maarten.
The Report also analyzes the governance and integrity architecture of the GoSM, the Report also analyzes
the governance and integrity practices of four of Sint Maarten’s SoCs in Assessment of the integrity
architecture of state-owned companies. This analysis and corresponding recommendations are
contained in Section 8 of the Report.
The Report concludes with a sequencing of Priority recommendations (section 9) for the GoSM and
SoCs to focus on in order to increase the level of maturity of the integrity architecture. Section 10 contains
Areas for future analysis which includes areas that warrant further review by the GoSM. The main
body of the Report is summarized in Section 11, the Conclusion.
The appendices of the Report contain detailed information supporting the Report. Appendix A consists of
a glossary of terms and acronyms used throughout the Report. Appendix B includes key global standards
that were referred to in formulating recommendations throughout the Report. Appendix C contains
research findings from existing integrity and other pertinent external assessments of relevant topics.
Findings from open source research, including media and social media sources, that were reviewed during
the desk research phase of the engagement are included in Appendix D. Appendix E contains a detailed
framework gap analysis which compares Sint Maarten’s current proposed Code of Conduct to leading
practices.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
29

The scope of the Inquiry did not include the integrity and proper functioning of Parliament, the Judiciary
(the joint Court of Justice), Stichting Overheids Accountants Bureau (“SOAB”), the High Councils of State
(Council of Advice, General Audit Chamber, and the Ombudsman) or other Governmental functions not
explicitly referred to in this Report. Any references to these entities and institutions in this Report should
not be construed as an assessment of integrity and proper functioning.
The Report reflects the Inquiry team’s work that was performed within the scope, budget, and time
limitations specified by the Steering Committee. Areas for future analysis highlights areas that the
Inquiry team recommends for further review, but which were not covered in this Report due to scope,
budget, and time limitations.
Finally, this Inquiry is separate from penal investigations carried out by the Office of the Public Prosecutor,
and our observations and recommendations should not be viewed as legally or forensically admissible
evidence. Whatever follow-on actions the GoSM decides to take with the information contained in this
Report is entirely at the discretion of the GoSM.
4.2. Approach
4.2.1. Desk research conducted
The Inquiry team connected with a range of sources to obtain relevant information and documentation for
the Inquiry including the seven Ministries of the GoSM, four SoCs, former Government officials, industry,
13
media as well as public and open sources. The Inquiry team also made document requests from each
Ministry and SoC and supplemented this data with documentation requested “on-the-spot” during
interviews. In addition, the Inquiry team utilized its Corporate Intelligence Center of Excellence (a group of
interdisciplinary research professionals based in Washington, DC) to obtain documents in multiple
languages through research of syndicated and open source databases. The Inquiry team also leveraged our
Center of Excellence to perform research of syndicated media databases and open sources in order to
identify public perceptions of integrity, background information and a number of laws and regulations.
The Inquiry team collected documentation relating to integrity and good governance legislation,
regulations, policies and plans, and past integrity assessments that have taken place in Sint Maarten.
A review was conducted of publicly available, relevant reports from the Council of Advice, Ombudsman,
General Audit Chamber, Social Economic Council, and Law Enforcement Council including the following:
 General Audit Chamber’s Baseline Study of Institutional Integrity Management in Sint Maarten
 Criminaliteitsbeeldanalyse - Sint Maarten Crime Pattern Analysis
 Detentiecapaciteit – Sint Maarten Detention Capacity Report
 United States’ Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report
 Caribbean Financial Action Task Force (“CFATF”): Mutual Evaluation Report
 Third Report of Findings: Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (“PEFA”) Stocktaking
Financial Management Sint Maarten
 General Audit Chamber’s Sint Maarten Financial Compliance 2012 Report and selected GoSM
Financial Statements
13
The Inquiry team used established and proven research and analytic methodologies to properly characterize numerous sources and
to properly categorize and characterize verbal, digital and written information. The assessment cites the sources that were the basis
for individual judgments or observations to the highest degree possible while maintaining the integrity and confidentiality of the
individuals with whom the Inquiry team held interviews.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
31

15
director and business licenses to assess compliance with the existing regulatory framework. In addition,
the Inquiry team assessed procurement processes and analyzed controls for the payment of services and
goods to assess potential vulnerabilities that may exist within these operational activities.
4.3. Limitations
GoSM employees in large part were very receptive to sharing information concerning integrity issues. The
multiple ongoing integrity inquiries, including a concurrent integrity inquiry called for by the Prime
Minister (“PM”), as well as an assessment by Transparency International, contribute to the heightened
awareness of integrity issues on-the-ground. Many of the individuals stated a wide variety of concerns to
the Inquiry team about various issues surrounding governance and transparency of the GoSM. The Inquiry
team was also, in some instances, contacted by stakeholders who, unsolicited wished to share what they
perceived to be integrity issues involving Government and SoC officials.
Several individuals, however, expressed hesitation to provide certain types of information, and many
reported to the Inquiry team that they feared reprisal from their supervisors and that they believed that it
would be impossible to ensure anonymity of their statements. The Inquiry team repeatedly heard
statements such as, “this is a small island. I can’t say anything because everyone will know it came from
me,” and “they may not be able to fire me, but they can make my life miserable and I need to be careful of
that.” This fear of reprisal likely reduced the availability of data interviewees were willing to share with the
Inquiry team.
Some interviewees also reported confusion and frustration about the many ongoing integrity assessments
in Sint Maarten and for having to “say the same thing” to multiple assessment teams. Some interviewees
made statements such as “I don’t know which team is the one to trust.”
Also cited in interviews was confusion over the PM reportedly stating the GoSM civil service would not
16
cooperate with this Inquiry, according to an open source press report dated October 3, 2013. It is noted,
however, that on January 31, 2014, a Sint Maarten news outlet reported that “the government still
disagrees with the way the Kingdom Council of Ministers [initiated the] integrity investigation in St.
Maarten, but the threat that civil servants would refuse to cooperate with the Governor’s committee is off
17
the table.” Some interviewees asked the Inquiry team if they were allowed to speak with this Inquiry team
as they did not know if it was authorized by the PM.
15
A judgmental sample is a non-probability sampling technique where the researcher selects units to be sampled based on experience
and interests in a particular set of data.
16
“St. Maarten prime Minister: civil service will not cooperate with any Dutch instruction,” BearingPoint Caribbean, October 3, 2013;
http://www.bearingpointcaribbean.com/st-maarten-prime-Minister-civil-service-will-not-cooperate-with-any-dutch-instruction
17
“Wescot-Williams about integrity investigations: ‘Let them get it out of the way’,” Today, January 31, 2014;
http://www.todaysxm.com/2014/01/31/wescot-williams-about-integrity-investigations-let-them-get-it-out-of-the-way
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
33

5. Definition of integrity for purposes
of this Report
Integrity in the context of public administration is often defined in the negative, with an emphasis on the
absence of corruption. While this narrow concept of integrity may be appropriate in certain circumstances,
it fails to fully address the purpose of a well-functioning government, which is ultimately to act as a faithful
steward of public resources and provide for the needs of a governed population. This Report approaches
integrity from a broader perspective that is embedded in the notion of how a government should function
with integrity, and is closely aligned with global integrity standards and tailored to address the specific
integrity dimensions that have been highlighted by the Kingdom of the Netherlands as relevant for Sint
Maarten.
Specifically, this Report will characterize government integrity as (1) consistent compliance with all
relevant integrity related laws, regulations, and policies, (2) the proper functioning of controls to mitigate
the risk of corruption, and (3) adherence to the principles of the rule of law. The criteria for integrity are
represented in the global standards referenced in Appendix B and will form the basis for the following
assessment of the GoSM.
Consistent compliance with laws, regulations, and policies
This Report assesses the quality of existing anti-corruption and transparency laws, regulations, and
policies, in addition to internal controls and accountability mechanisms bearing on public integrity.
Emphasis will be placed on the regulation of vulnerable sectors, including gambling, prostitution, and
immigration, as well as vulnerable activities such as permitting and licensing of large infrastructure
projects and other public works. The Report will also identify relevant gaps in the public integrity
legislative framework and provide recommendations for improvements.
Proper functioning of controls to mitigate the risk of corruption
Corruption is often defined as the abuse of public authority for private gain and is incompatible with
contemporary notions of public integrity. This Report will assess the framework in place for preventing,
detecting, integrating and remediating corruption in public administration, including, but not limited to:
 Bribery
 Nepotism
 Cronyism
 Kickbacks
 Fraud and theft
 Trading in influence
 Inappropriate gifts and promises
 Conflicts of interest
 Misuse and manipulation of information
 Abuse of authority
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
35

6. Local context
6.1. Sint Maarten constitutional background
The current administrative and governance structures in place in Sint Maarten were formally
institutionalized during the process for a more autonomous status that transformed the island from a part
of the Netherlands Antilles into a country within the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
This process started in June 2000 when Sint Maarten held a constitutional referendum in accordance with
the right of self-determination of peoples in which the inhabitants of Sint Maarten voted to become an
21
autonomous country within the Kingdom of the Netherlands. As part of this process, in 2005, Sint
Maarten agreed to cooperate with The Netherlands in performing an analysis of government finances and
outstanding debt and committed to an improvement program related to good governance and integrity
22
which included the creation of a Code of Conduct for civil servants and Ministers.
As a consequence of the dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles, Sint Maarten established several new
Government institutions. Many of the former National Ordinances and National Decrees containing
general measures of the Netherlands Antilles were accepted by the new autonomous country and were also
23
supplemented by new island ordinances and decrees that were adopted in 10/10/10. Today, Sint Maarten
has autonomy over internal affairs, though it continues to be a part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
with the Kingdom Government maintaining responsibility for, amongst others, defense and foreign
24
relations.
6.2. Structure of the Government of Sint Maarten
Sint Maarten was governed by the Island Regulation of the Netherlands Antilles as an island territory prior
to 10/10/10. After achieving autonomy, Sint Maarten adopted a Constitution and established its own
governance structure, with a Governor as Head of the Government, a Parliament, and a Council of
25
Ministers headed by the PM.
Governor
The Governor is a representative of the King and representative of the Kingdom Government and functions
as the head of the GoSM. The continuing bond between Sint Maarten and the countries of the Kingdom of
26
the Netherlands is partly reflected in the role of the Governor as a representative of the King.
Parliament
The highest legislative body of Sint Maarten is the Parliament which consists of 15 members who are
27
elected for a four-year period. The Parliament elects a President and Deputy President from its members.
21
Explanatory Memorandum, Translation of the Official Publication of Sint Maarten, AB 2010 GT no.1;
http://decentrale.regelgeving.overheid.nl/cvdr/images/Sint%20Maarten/i240625.pdf
22
Dutch Government Websites; https://zoek.officielebekendmakingen.nl/kst-30300-IV-18-b1
23
Landsverordening overgangsbepalingen van wetgeving en bestuur
24
Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Article 3; http://www.arubaforeignaffairs.com/afa/readBlob.do?id=704
25
Sint Maarten Parliament; http://www.sxmparliament.org
26
Sint Maarten Cabinet of the Governor; http://www.kabgsxm.com
27
Sint Maarten Parliament ; http://www.sxmparliament.org
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
37

32
on the island. By the early 1980s, tourism had taken over as the main source of revenue for the country,
33 34
and currently, around 80% of the economy is related to tourism.
Culture
The range of cultural influences in Sint Maarten is reflected in the number of languages spoken and the
many different nationalities present on the island. The official language of Sint Maarten is both Dutch and
English, though Spanish, French, Creole, Papiamento language and other languages are also spoken.
Although Dutch is one of the official languages, it is not widely spoken and primarily used in official
35
documents. It is estimated that there are over 90 different nationalities represented in Sint Maarten.
Many students in Sint Maarten choose to study abroad in the Netherlands and the United States, though
some opt to travel to surrounding islands and other nearby countries. There is an apparent “brain drain” of
36
educated youth who do not return to Sint Maarten to work after studying abroad.
Close intersection between business, citizens and the public sector
Sint Maarten is characterized by closely-knit social networks that play an important role in the island’s
economic and political affairs, according to reports made to the Inquiry team. Despite the political
transformations associated with obtaining autonomous status, the political culture in Sint Maarten
remains deeply embedded in a tradition of local island politics. The small size of the island has allowed a
culture of patronage politics to persist, and politicians actively interact amongst themselves, business
owners and civil society. It is not uncommon for citizens to call members of parliament, Ministers, and
other officials directly, and they will frequently stop them on the street to express concerns, displeasure or
request favors. The political culture of the island is also influenced by prominent families that are well-
connected to the Government – often through social and familial ties. Such an intertwined and interactive
political culture often emerges in microstates like Sint Maarten with small territories (approximately 16
37
square miles) and modest populations (approximately 40,000 inhabitants).
It is not uncommon for individuals in business and Government circles to be inter-connected through one
or more social or familial networks, and actions by civil servants or elected officials often impact family
members or close friends. For example, Government officials in charge of overseeing public procurements
may have personal relationships with many of the vendors seeking to win a contract. Furthermore, the
limited size of the working population results in a limited pool of skilled resources which adversely affects
the competition.
The tight-knit community in Sint Maarten also facilitates the rapid dissemination of information through
informal channels, and many details about Government officials and public proceedings spread quickly
verbally and through blogs and other social media venues.
It is this close interconnection between the public and private sector that creates a heightened risk of
conflicts of interest, abuse of office, and unethical practices, as well as a range of procurement fraud,
32
“St. Maarten Yesterday,” St. Maarten the Friendly Island; http://www.stmartinisland.org/destination-st-martin/st-martin-
history.html
33
Id.
34
Country Report Sint Maarten, Rabobank Economic Research Department;
https://economics.rabobank.com/publications/2013/september/country-report-sint-maarten/
35
“Preliminary Results Census 2011 – Thirty Percent Population Born in St. Maarten,” Today, October 15, 1012;
http://www.todaysxm.com/2012/10/15/preliminary-results-census-2011-thirty-percent-population-was-born-in-st-maarten/
36
The Situation of Children and Adolescents in Sint Maarten, UNICEF;
http://www.unicef.nl/media/1359112/sint_maarten_sitan_public_version__28english_29.pdf
37
Sint Maarten Country Profile, CIA Fact Book; https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/sk.html
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
39

7. Assessment of the integrity
architecture of the Government of
Sint Maarten
7.1. Global standards and leading practices
The Inquiry team conducted a broad survey of global public integrity standards and leading governance
practices utilized in the international community to develop a set of relevant benchmarks for the Inquiry.
The Inquiry team relied on these benchmarks to guide their research and inform the findings and
recommendations that are offered throughout the Report. The global standards and leading practices
referred to by the Inquiry team reflect the established legal and policy frameworks at the forefront of public
and private sector efforts to strengthen governance and enhance public integrity around the globe.
Collectively, they serve as a framework through which countries, international organizations, the business
community, and civil society coordinate and advance an agenda of good governance under the rule of law.
Foremost among these global standards is the United Nations Convention Against Corruption (“UNCAC”
or “Convention”), which entered into force in 2005 and represents a watershed in the development of a
global consensus on public integrity. With 171 state parties, UNCAC is the most widely subscribed to anti-
corruption and public integrity standard, and establishes an international benchmark for the actions nation
states must take to combat public corruption and enhance integrity and efficiency in public administration.
The Convention outlines a series of mandatory, strongly encouraged, and optional measures to prevent,
deter, punish, and mitigate the harm caused by corruption. The provisions outlined in the Convention are
intended to be implemented in accordance with the principles of a state’s domestic law, and therefore
parties generally have some flexibility to interpret obligations within the context of their national legal
38
system.
A number of the provisions in UNCAC focus on preventative measures, including institutional structures,
policies, and procedures that countries should put in place to mitigate the risk of corruption. For example,
under Chapter II of the Convention, countries are required to implement:
“Preventive policies, such as the establishment of anticorruption bodies and enhanced
transparency in the financing of election campaigns and political parties. States must
endeavor to ensure that their public services are subject to safeguards that promote
efficiency, transparency and recruitment based on merit. Once recruited, public
servants should be subject to codes of conduct, requirements for financial and other
disclosures, and appropriate disciplinary measures. Transparency and accountability
in matters of public finance must also be promoted, and specific requirements are
established for the prevention of corruption, in the particularly critical areas of the
public sector, such as the judiciary and public procurement. Those who use public
services must expect a high standard of conduct from their public servants. Preventing
public corruption also requires an effort from all members of society at large. For these
38
United Nations Convention Against Corruption, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
http://www.unodc.org/documents/treaties/UNCAC/Publications/Convention/08-50026_E.pdf
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
41

government’s stewardship of public funds has a direct and material impact on its citizens’ health,
welfare, and development. Corruption and lack of integrity in the administration of funds is a cancer
that plagues governments around the world, and is widely acknowledged as a major impediment to
development effectiveness. It is this recognition that has lead not only to global support for
combatting corruption, but the development of international standards on what steps a government
must take to strengthen integrity. These standards form the basis for this current Inquiry and the
39
foundation for the various procedural, regulatory and legal changes recommended in this Report.
 Strengthen domestic political support: A strong public integrity framework that is aligned with
the seven elements above can help improve public service delivery and raise public trust in
government, which is often closely correlated with heightened domestic political support. For
example, an effective procurement and financial management system can improve the efficiency and
quality of public procurements, which in turn improves the delivery of public services. Appropriate
transparency and public communications procedures can also help strengthen public trust in
government and contribute to greater domestic political support and stronger democratic
institutions.
 Improve international reputation: A number of global corruption indices exist that rank
countries on their level of perceived corruption and good governance. These indices affect the
international reputation of a country and may deter growth and investment into a market. While Sint
Maarten is not yet rated on the Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index (“CPI”),
this index is a globally-recognized tool for benchmarking a country’s reputation for integrity. The
Inquiry team’s assessment framework used in conducting this work addresses many of the factors
that can influence a country’s CPI score, and indeed countries that perform well on the CPI index are
generally those that demonstrate strong performance across the seven integrity pillars outlined
above. Although the CPI index is only one measurement of public integrity, it plays an important role
in shaping the public narrative around a country’s reputation for integrity - both domestically and
internationally. The Inquiry team uses the importance of the underlying CPI factors as a proxy for
the GoSM given the CPI’s worldwide acceptance.
Another key reference point is the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business Index. Although the World
Bank does not currently score Sint Maarten in the Ease of Doing Business Index, the country is listed
in the database and it is expected that both the CPI and the Ease of Doing Business Index will
contain ratings for the Sint Maarten in the future. Accordingly, it is critically important for the GoSM
to understand that governance indices will, in the future, have a significant impact on the
international reputation and standing of the GoSM in the global community.
 Attract foreign investment: Heightened global anti-corruption enforcement by national and
international regulators has put substantial pressure on companies to avoid entering markets that
are perceived to be prone to corruption. Multi-national companies have become very sophisticated in
making market entry investment decisions, and will often base investment decisions on factors that
are closely aligned with the elements contained in the integrity assessment framework, including, for
example, a country’s regulatory framework and enforcement apparatus. Countries with policies,
procedures, and practices in line with the seven elements above will often present a more favorable
investment environment for companies seeking to expand their operations.
39
“Corruption major impediment to advancing development, warn UN officials,” UN News Centre; December 9, 2009;
http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=33190#.U9mci_ldV1Y
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
43

7.2.2. Observations and recommendations
In any country, integrity and anti-corruption strategies are less likely to succeed without demonstrated
leadership at the highest levels of government. Senior public officials throughout the GoSM, including
some Ministers, have failed to consistently set a “tone at the top” that exemplifies the highest standards of
personal and professional integrity. While initial steps taken to create an Integrity Bureau are promising,
the overall lack of sufficient resources dedicated to this and the visible lapses of integrity of senior level
officials within the GoSM contribute to an overall finding of low maturity for this element as compared to
global benchmarks.
The following were identified as the key observations affecting the leadership, commitment, and devotion
of resources within the GoSM, according to interviews conducted and documents analyzed by the Inquiry
team:
 Inappropriate use of ministerial discretion and inconsistent demonstration of
integrity: Many civil servants and those outside Government do not appear to have confidence in
the integrity of their elected leaders, according to interviews and research of open sources. This lack
of confidence often stems from apparent inappropriate interference by Ministers with the routine
duties of civil servants or widely reported allegations of corruption that have not resulted in
enforcement action, according to reports made by interviewees to the Inquiry team and open source
information.
 Limited operational capacity of the Integrity Bureau: The GoSM has made strides to form an
Integrity Bureau (“Bureau” or “BISM”) which is a positive step towards better governance; however
the Bureau should be restructured to promote independence and effectiveness.
 No anonymous, administrative whistleblower provisions: Although reporting mechanisms
exist, provisions to ensure anonymity of complainants do not appear to be present within the GoSM,
which may deter complainants from reporting integrity breaches.
 Excessive discretion in lifting moratoriums on economic licenses and in amending
policy: At times, analysis suggests that certain Ministers act in a manner which appears to place
personal or political interests ahead of the interests of the people, particularly in lifting moratoriums
and amending policy.
 Low level of commitment to administration of asset declarations for Ministers: Asset
declarations are not consistently administered according to the National Ordinance Promotion to the
Integrity of Ministers (“Integrity Ordinance”). Limited checks on declarations appear to be
conducted and sanctions do not appear to be enforced for inaccurate declarations, according to
documents analyzed and interviewees.
Leadership, commitment, and devotion of resources
Inappropriate use of ministerial discretion and inconsistent demonstration of integrity
Observations Ministers should be expected to exercise their discretion in accordance with their
public duties and obligations and refrain from using their influence and authority
to further private interests. However, it appears that at times some Ministers in the
GoSM act according to their private interests, and integrity does not always appear
to be demonstrated at the highest levels of Government. Several interviewees
reported to the Inquiry team that they believed leadership is the main offender
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
45

instructed their Ministry not to issue negative Advices without first discussing it
with the Minister, according to interviewees. This was reported by three officials
within that Ministry who said that the Minister issued this rule to the entire
Ministry. One of those officials stated to the Inquiry team that this appears to be an
attempt to avoid negative Advices being documented. When asked why an
employee would not issue the negative Advice, the official stated to the Inquiry
team, “we can’t really get fired, but they can make your life miserable. It’s not a
written policy but [the Minister] told the Ministry across the board [so I have to
comply]…I’m just sick of getting threatened.” For more information on Advices, see
Systems and information sharing.
Potential abuse of power
Based on interviews conducted, Ministers may exert their influence and disrupt
daily activities of Government departments, at times hindering these departments
from effectively carrying out their functions.
Inspections/controls
Many inspections/controls team members stated to the Inquiry team that senior
officials such as Ministers, cabinet members, and SGs often interfered when
inspections/controls were conducted on prominent businesses or businesses tied
to prominent politicians or Government employees. An inspections/controls team
member stated to the Inquiry team,
“the biggest challenge in doing day to day job is politicians. This
year, it’s even worse than the other three years because it is
elections this year. Ministers get involved in day to day
operations and you can’t perform what you want to do. It hurts
you to know that as a citizen and Government worker you are
out there for the interest of the Government, and if you can only
give fines to middle class people, it’s not fair. All big fish get
away and do what they want. This is big obstacle in the
department, the guys are very upset about it, but at the end of
the day the Minister is the boss.”
Examples provided to the Inquiry team of senior level interference are detailed
below:
 A Government official provided a firsthand account of an incident that
occurred on the day of a nightclub opening. Labor, fire, and food safety
inspections needed to be completed, and over 800 people were expected to
attend, according to the official. Following the inspection/control, the team
was inclined to “close it down” as the proper fire extinguishers were not in
place and no emergency exit existed which was a major concern as so many
people were expected. Individuals were also identified working at the
nightclub without work permits. The official recounted to the Inquiry team
that a representative of the business stated, “we paid the Minister so
much…you can’t close us down.” The official told the Inquiry team that as a
result, rather than closing down the nightclub and stopping the opening, quick
fixes had to be made so that the opening could proceed as planned.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
47

needed to be re-done on the new location. The next morning, the official stated
that a memo was provided to the inspector saying that the business owner had
complained of harassment. The inspector reportedly provided eight witnesses
from the multidisciplinary inspection team who had a different account.
Ultimately, the official stated that the same high official referenced above told
the inspector to “not go too far” on issuing a report on the illegal operation of
the restaurant. The official stated that the high official and the business owner
were known friends on the island, and therefore, the inspections/control team
could not effectively enforce.
 According to three department heads/former department heads, an employee
within the GoSM had a vending license that expired in 2007. The license was
originally issued before the employee became a civil servant. These three
officials confirmed that the employee continues to work in the Ministry while
maintaining the vending business with an expired license. To date, no action
appears to have been taken by the GoSM and specifically inspections/controls
teams have not closed down the business despite an expired license for seven
years as well as a problematic secondary activity and a potential conflict of
interest.
 An inspector described a firsthand account of a control at a hotel. According to
the inspector, on the way to the hotel, a senior official called the hotel owner to
tell them the team was on their way. The inspector stated to the Inquiry team
that it appeared that the senior official was giving the business an unfair
warning of the control.
 A restaurant owned by a close relative of a Minister was inspected in February
2013. According to the Inspection report review by the inquiry team, the
business owner was suspected of, “violation of the National Decree Foreigner
Labor article 2 paragraph 1, Labor Regulation article 9 paragraph 1a and
41
National Decree Registration of Labor Force article 28 paragraph 1 and 29.”
The report stated that the inspector witnessed eight people working in the
restaurant, four of whom did not have valid work permits. The report details
the personal information for each of these four individuals, all four of whom
were French nationals. The inspector also asked the business owner for their
business registration, work roster and personnel list as required by National
Decree Registration of Labor Force. The business owner was unable to
produce these documents, according to the report. The owner stated that they
were waiting for an operational license in order to register the business with
Labor Affairs. The owner stated in writing on the report that they had been
waiting for the license since March 2012 and were told that “several
departments did not complete its part.” The owner wrote that they had been in
42
operation for two months.
According to a firsthand account, the Minister made a call the next day to an
41
Labor Inspections Report, February 2013
42
Id.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
49

donation to a party they did not support they stated, “the fear is that next time you
need a permit or cooperation, you won’t get it. Something in the future will be
withheld.”
Exemption letters
Based on interviews and documents obtained, Ministers circumvent policy by
issuing “comfort letters” or “exemption letters” which reportedly permit
businesses, buildings, or boats to operate in the absence of necessary
licenses/permits. Interviewees stated that laws and regulations remain vague
concerning this practice, and it is unclear as to whether or not the Minister has the
authority to issue such exemptions.
Four examples of exemption letters, were obtained by the Inquiry team dated
between 2012 and 2013. These letters were signed by a former Minister for various
businesses offering four months to “remain operational pending the issuance of the
required license(s).” The letters indicate that the businesses were already
operational despite lacking the required licenses. Once this was discovered, it does
not appear that any sanction was placed on the business for operating without a
license, but rather the exemption letter was issued, legalizing operations. The
justification provided in the letters about the issuance of exemptions reads as
follows:
1. “That you have already applied for the necessary license(s)
2. That the likelihood of your license(s) being issued at the end of the
application process is high
3. That you will immediately take necessary action to ensure that you
comply with all requirements of the license(s)
4. That your sole proprietorship is the main source of income and
thus support for you and your family, the closure of which would
result in severe financial hardship for your family
5. That we recognize the challenging economic circumstances that our
island is presently experiencing, the result of which could possibly
result in job creation, wherever possible
6. That closure of your business at this critical stage, and the
resultant financial setbacks, could potentially destroy your ability
to resume/reopen your business in the future when the required
44
license(s) have been issued.”
Based on interviews with TEZVT officials, it appears that many businesses that
would be eligible for exemption letters under the criteria above do not receive
exemption letters. Due to the absence of published and authorized criteria around
selecting which businesses may receive exemption letters, it appears that Ministers
may choose to issue exemption letters for businesses at their discretion.
44
Four exemption letters dated between 2012 and 2013
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
51

[they] will continue breaking the law because no incentive to stop.” The lack of
action taken against these leaders risks demonstrating to employees that integrity
breaches are acceptable. These widely-known scandals were mentioned in the
majority of interviews conducted by the Inquiry team, and many department heads
stated to the Inquiry team that even if they wanted to create a department that had
zero tolerance for corruption, they believed they would receive little support from
Ministry leadership – and in some cases, opposition. Furthermore, many
interviewees across Ministries stated that they believed the GoSM was not
committed to enforcement and that they did not receive communications from the
Government that action was being taken to resolve widely speculated integrity
breaches. While the investigation of these cases was outside the mandate of the
Inquiry team, the frequency of mentions of these cases in interviews underscore
the serious lack of support that the political leadership has around the issue of
integrity and tone at the top.
Recommendations Commit to demonstrating integrity at the highest levels of leadership
and promoting accountability for misconduct regardless of political
standing. In order to demonstrate this commitment, transform the
existing integrity initiative into an official “Fight Against Corruption”
campaign focused on increasing enforcement activities. As a first
indication of commitment to fighting corruption, adhere to the
principles of UNCAC and publicly commit to the implementation of the
principles and procedures of UNCAC: The Government should make every
effort to improve its public perception and demonstrate its commitment to fighting
corruption. Once the Government declares its intention to pursue an integrity
initiative, it must follow up on its commitments and demonstrate progress. Bold
statements without concrete actions will undermine public trust. Hold Ministers to
a standard of objectivity. Procedures should be in place for an employee of a
Ministry to complain if they believe a Minister is abusing his or her discretion in
the performance of their duty, circumventing approved procedures or
unreasonable interference with the duties of a civil servant. Gross deviations
should be grounds for dismissal or public censure. Training on these procedures
should be part of the annual ethics training program.
Create an Integrity Project Management Office (“PMO”) to serve under
the Council of Ministers to implement the recommendations included
within this Report: The PMO should be primarily staffed with senior officials
with the requisite authority to institute implementation efforts within the
Ministries. The Integrity Bureau should convene Integrity PMO meetings and
should work with the PMO to create consistent implementation plans. It is
imperative that some members of the PMO be Government officials to facilitate
access to information and inter-ministerial cooperation. The Council of Ministers
should ultimately be responsible for driving the implementation of
recommendations.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
53

systematically monitor public perception, consider trends, judge how messages are
received, and gauge improvements in perception over time in order to measure the
effectiveness of the Fight Against Corruption.
Leadership, commitment, and devotion of resources
Limited operational capacity of the Integrity Bureau
Observations The Integrity Bureau is currently in the process of being established through the
Ministry of General Affairs. According to information received from the Integrity
Bureau, their function will be the following:
“BISM is an Integrity expertise center and managing entity
which will be in charge of Integrity- Reports Handling,
Integrity Risk assessments, Integrity trends analysis, Advice,
Integrity Training and promoting Integrity Awareness and –
Education for the public service of Sint Maarten. The
Organizational structure for BISM is presented as an
independent bureau with its own duties directly under the
Minister responsible for Integrity. This positioning guarantees
a specialized and dedicated approach, which otherwise would
be diminished if approached as a combined/additional task and
ensures its independence and the carrying out of its functions
with the necessary resources and autonomy. Secretaries
General and Department Heads continue to play an important
role in Integrity management within the Ministries, but get
support from the independent Integrity Bureau.
The department will function independently, directly under the
Minister of General Affairs. This structure will ensure that this
entity is truly of an independent nature. The Department Head
will report directly to the Minister responsible for Integrity
Policy, which is the Minister of General Affairs. Ultimately
checks and balances for the Bureau can occur via the High
Councils of State, in particular the Ombudsman and General
Audit Chamber. Complaints about the Bureau or the outcome of
investigations related to Integrity violations can also be
directed to the Bureau of the Ombudsman; after the terms of all
internal procedures (e.g. appeals via civil servants court or
court of first instance) have been met. The Chamber is
authorized to carry out certain audits on its own initiative,
including investigation of matters of integrity of political
46
functionaries or civil servants (art. 33 Lvo AR).”
Anyone (including civilians) can file a complaint against a civil servant to the
Integrity Bureau but no complaints can be made against the SoCs, according to an
interview with a Ministry of General Affairs official. The official stated that
currently no legislation exists to support the establishment of the Integrity Bureau,
46
Sint Maarten Integrity Bureau, Government of Sint Maarten; http://integritysxmgov.org/index.php/about-integrity-sint-maarten
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
55

job being threatened.
A department head stated,
“what sense does it make to establish and appoint these persons
of integrity and not have any legislation to support the people
in these functions? The trajectory to get this approved is a
minimum of 2 years and that is fast track and basically you are
fooling me if you are appointing these people – we are basically
pretending. There is no framework for what you keep to
yourself and what you report as a Person of Confidence. If you
are training these people on integrity – what are they being
trained in? Why is there no transparency? I want to know what
they are being trained, and I feel I have a right to know. There
is no framework to protect whistleblowers and no framework
on what to report, so why would you say anything?”
Many interviewees stated to the Inquiry team that it was not clear to them how and
under what criteria the Persons of Confidence were appointed. The interviews
reported to the Inquiry team that this lack of transparency and established criteria
were factors that reduced their confidence in disclosing sensitive information
around integrity issues.
Confusion around reporting mechanisms for integrity breaches
The standard protocol around reporting mechanisms does not appear to be clearly
defined for civil servants. The Inquiry team received different answers from
Government employees about whom they could turn to if they wanted to report an
integrity issue. Some said, upon identification of an integrity breach, that they
could report it to the department head or SG, some said the Minister directly, some
said Parliament, some said the Ombudsman, some said the National Detectives,
and some noted the Integrity Bureau. Two interviewees told the Inquiry team
about specific issues that they felt were integrity breaches and asked the Inquiry
team to whom within the Government they should report it to, as they stated that
they did not know. Other interviewees also stated that an individual was not
allowed to report to the Ombudsman unless it was the “last resort.” One
interviewee stated to the Inquiry team that they were told by a supervisor not to
report an issue to the Ombudsman as it would “not look good.” A Person of
Confidence stated to the Inquiry team that complaints made to the Ombudsman
were anonymous, whereas the Ombudsman’s website states that a complaint must
contain the name and address of the complainant.
People may report integrity breaches to the Integrity Bureau or the Ombudsman
but neither allows for anonymous reporting nor for protection of whistleblowers
when they report misconduct, according to civil servants directly involved with
47
both bodies. Based on interviews and documentation reviewed by the Inquiry
team, the Ombudsman and Integrity Bureau appear to be mechanisms to only
report personal complaints. For example, no mechanism appears to exist to report
47
Sint Maarten Ombudsman Office, Government of Sint Maarten; http://www.ombudsmansxm.com/page.php?page=2
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
57

SoCs.)
 Awareness and outreach to include local and international stakeholder
outreach and communications with civil society, private sector, and global
standard setting bodies; internal messaging and communications; internal and
public awareness campaigns; conducting research on anti-corruption global
trends; conducting public sentiment analysis; website maintenance, media,
and public reporting.
 Education, advice, and training to include creation and dissemination of
integrity trainings for all staff levels including senior leadership on compliance
with integrity policies and procedures; providing advice and help for GoSM
officials who are confronting ethical challenges, disseminating training on how
to effectively share information, how to conduct risk analysis with the intention
of preventing and detecting integrity breaches, specialized anti-corruption
training, specialized supervisor leadership training, forged document training;
hosting integrity-related events, speaker series and workshops; hosting public
education events on integrity laws and regulations and society’s role; and
coordination activities with departments on their integrity training and
education needs.
The selection of commissioners should be based on clear profiles and appointment
should be made by National Decree. Job profiles for the commissioners should call
for highly qualified experts with strong technical capability in the commissioner
field (i.e. education and training) as well as extensive experience working in the
anti-corruption and integrity space. Equally qualified staff should be hired under
each function to assist commissioners in executing their tasks. No department
head should be hired, but rather commissioners should work in a collaborative
manner. The SG of each Ministry should act as the liaison with the Integrity
Bureau for implementation activities, and the Bureau should have a SoC liaison,
such as a Chief Compliance Officer, who will be in charge of implementing strong
integrity programs within SoCs.
Create an independent Integrity Bureau Oversight Committee to
monitor progress of the Integrity Bureau in fulfilling its mandate: This
Committee’s function will be to reduce the risk of integrity breaches inside the
Integrity Bureau and to monitor the progress made by the Integrity Bureau in
strengthening the integrity architecture within the Government. The Oversight
Committee should be comprised of individuals independent of Government with
international credentials of integrity. The selection of candidates should be based
on clear profiles and appointment should be made by National Decree.
The Integrity Bureau should be required to submit and publish quarterly progress
updates of activities performed and progress made to strengthen the integrity
architecture of the Government. The Oversight Committee should be required to
submit and publish responses on reported progress of the Integrity Bureau.
The Oversight Committee should initiate compliance testing activities to test new
controls and verify progress reported by the Integrity Bureau. Appropriately
redacted results of compliance testing initiatives should be documented and
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
59

anonymous complaint, the official said “yes.” When asked if contact information
for individuals complaining needed to be provided, they said “yes.” When the
Inquiry team asked who had access to the system, the official said “the [Minister]
or the SG.”
Interviewees reported to the Inquiry team that the lack of an anonymous reporting
mechanism was the reason they chose not to report. A former department head
stated, “within Government there are a lot of people who want to report issues but
they don’t know where to go to, who to trust. Everyone has families to feed. We do
not want to get fired.” A culture of fear exists within the Government, and the
Inquiry team saw this firsthand from SGs on down. Many people were scared to
share sensitive information with the Inquiry team as they felt they would “get in
trouble” for sharing. Many stated that due to the island being so small, they knew
that any information they provided to the Inquiry team could be “traced back” to
them, and as such, they did not want to share information on integrity breaches
that they claimed to know of. Overall, raising concerns upon identification of
wrongdoings does not appear to be encouraged within the Government based on
information shared in multiple interviews. Firsthand accounts were shared with
the Inquiry team of people being sent home or “physically pushed out” after
disagreeing with a Minister for activities not being within policy or not signing off
on documents. A few weeks later, interviewees stated that they received letters that
they were “reinstated.” In order to maintain the confidentiality of these employees,
details around their suspensions/dismissal are not included. A civil servant stated,
“when you say no, they send you home. And it is hard to say no then.” A leader of a
union explained that, based on their experience with civil servants, there is a
“major culture of fear, if you speak up you are victimized. There are no places to
help civil servants.” A department head explained that they knew of civil servants
that “went against the Minister” and they “got dragged through the mud so badly.”
Many interviewees reported to the Inquiry team that there was no one to report
incidents to as many of the problems are with leadership. A department head
stated,
“personally, the whole integrity issue has to start up there. They
are our bosses, [employees] will do what they have to do to
maintain personal integrity, but when it comes from the head.
They feel they may be fired if they don’t obey ministerial
orders.”
A Ministry of Justice official noted this fear of reprisal to the Inquiry team by
stating, “I do have examples of bribery but I can’t share. I’ve only been here three
years or four years – why should I share and ruin my career? While the department
heads all know. Everyone knows and does nothing, so why should I share?”
Recommendations Establish a universal, cross-Ministerial, anonymous complaint hotline
administered by a third-party vendor. Clearly define reporting
mechanisms within the Government for civil servants to file
complaints regarding suspected integrity breaches. The Government
should visibly support this complaint mechanism and encourage the
public and civil servants to report wrongdoings as active participants
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
61

Whistleblower Anonymous Complaint Mechanism
Leadership, commitment, and devotion of resources
Excessive discretion in lifting moratoriums on economic licenses and amending policy
Observations Certain licenses currently have moratoriums which prohibit the issuance of any
new licenses covered by the moratorium. Moratoriums on economic licenses
appear to be lifted often by Ministers in a subjective manner, and the lifting of the
moratorium does not always appear to benefit the public.
Adjusting policy/lifting moratoriums without strong justification
According to a TEZVT official, in order to lift a moratorium, the Advice should be
signed off by the associated policy department to provide the justification for the
lift, and moratoriums are reportedly able to be lifted if a business need is
demonstrated. The justification provided for lifting a moratorium often appears to
be lacking. For example, in February 2014 a moratorium on bars and restaurants
was lifted and the reason provided in a document on the GoSM website was “that
the Government wants to stimulate entrepreneurship and the economic growth of
48
Sint Maarten.”
The Inquiry team obtained and analyzed email correspondence from June 2014
between a member of a Minister’s cabinet in which they stated that
“the cabinet of our Minister would like to adjust/amend the
Casino Policy, in the way it would be possible to establish a
Casino in a restricted area (e.g. at the Airport after the
clearance area), where only travelers can enter the casino and
not the people that are not traveling… Could you please draft
48
Policy: Lifting of Moratorium on Bar & Restaurants, Ministry of TEZVT; http://www.sintmaartengov.org/Policy and
Reports/Policy Lifting of Moratorium on Bar and Restaurant.pdf
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
63

According to an official with direct knowledge of this case and who provided this
information to the Inquiry team, the Minister lifted the moratorium to request two
additional licenses to operate brothels and instructed to whom the licenses should
go. One reportedly went to a close relative. Multiple sources, including
Government officials and brothel owners confirmed to the Inquiry team that the
Minister granted a license for a brothel to their close relative when the moratorium
was lifted. The other license that was granted went to a company that is allegedly
affiliated with a former Minister, according to a Ministry of Justice official and
open source media reports.
Excessive influence over public transportation licenses
The Minister of TEZVT appears to have significant influence on the process for
administering public transportation licenses.
Interviewees from the Ministry of TEZVT stated to the Inquiry team that public
transportation licenses are administered based on the Minister’s instruction and
not awarded through a normal queue of applicants. No publicly available criteria
on what order to award public transportation licenses was identified by the Inquiry
team. According to a Ministry of TEZVT official, applicants may not be granted a
public transportation license either because there is a moratorium or because they
are not on the Minister’s instruction list. Another Ministry of TEZVT official stated,
“you are not giving a fair chance to the people who did apply. There are now over
400 licenses. There are 500 pending requests. And there is no expiration on the
request.” Complaints have been made from individuals who applied through the
official application process but whose names did not appear on a Minister
instruction. The Inquiry team obtained and reviewed five examples of letters from
applicants asking the Ministry of TEZVT to explain why they were not awarded
50
licenses. According to a Ministry of TEZVT official, these individuals may have
been waiting for years to obtain a license and “technically meet all the
requirements,” but when the Minister lifts the moratorium they are able to choose
to whom they would like to grant licenses.
The Ombudsman issued a report in 2012, which is available on the Ombudsman
website, on a public transportation license complaint filed in 2011 concerning taxi
license requests submitted in 2002 and 2009 that were not acted upon by the
Public Transportation License department. In the report, the department head is
quoted in the report as saying,
“The request of Mr... has been placed on hold as have all the
other requests regarding taxi and bus permits. Up until 2010
there was a moratorium regarding the issuance of taxi and/or
bus permit in place. The moratorium has since been lifted, but
no concrete decision has been taken with regard to the actual
issuance of additional permits due to ongoing evaluations of the
sector and the overall restructuring of Public Transportation in
50
Letters from applicants to the Ministry of TEZVT about issuance of public transportation licenses.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
65

Taxi Licenses Issued Between May 2012 and
August 2013
13%
87%
At Minister's Request Without Minister's Request
Bus Licenses Issued Between May 2012 and
November 2013
32%
68%
At Minister's Request Without Minister's Request
According to a Ministry of TEZVT official, there also appears to be an issue around
awarding licenses for “help drivers,” individuals that are granted a temporary
license to assist the license holder in the event they become ill. The official stated to
the Inquiry team that abuse occurs in the issuance of help driver licenses as they
are granted even when it is clear that the license holder is not ill. As part of the
application process for a help driver the official license holder must submit an
55
“original Dr. letter.” The Inquiry team obtained and reviewed an example of an
55
Checklist for Help Driver Application
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
67

transportation licenses to be issued in line with queue priority. Any licenses
granted to individuals outside the established queue should also require a written
justification by the authorizing Minister. The rationale for granting a license on an
exceptional basis should be recorded alongside the recipient in the public roster of
licensees and subject to public scrutiny.
Publish roster of bus and public transportation licenses and other
economic licenses: The improper granting of bus and public transportation
licenses has undermined the purpose of the licensing system and eroded public
confidence in Government integrity. Increasing transparency around the licensing
process could mitigate this problem in a number of ways. A public roster of
licensees would prevent a single person from holding multiple licenses, and it
would make it more difficult for Ministers to distribute licenses as personal favors
or political tools. A public roster would also increase the likelihood that licenses are
granted to the intended recipients (i.e. individuals who will rely on the license for
their primary source of income).
Leadership, commitment, and devotion of resources
Low level of commitment to administration of asset declarations for Ministers
Observations Under the Integrity Ordinance, Ministers are obliged to submit a written
58
declaration to the PM within 30 days of appointment.
Article 2 states, “The Minister guarantees the reliability of the information in the
declaration.” Ministers and their spouses or partners are obliged to declare the
following:
“a. a detailed description of the commercial interests that they
hold or manage;
b. a detailed description of their other asset elements;
c. a detailed description of the nature of their secondary
positions and secondary activities;
d. a statement of whether any income or benefits are
associated with their secondary positions and secondary
activities, in any form whatsoever, and, to the extent that these
are associated with financial remuneration, the extent thereof;
e. a detailed description of the children’s commercial interests
and other asset elements.
5. Asset elements, not including immovable property, that do
not exceed a threshold value of ANG 20.000,-- need not be
59
reported.”
Article 3 states that the PM,
“shall decide which commercial interests, secondary positions
58
Landsverordening Integriteitbevordering Ministers
59
Id.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
69

declaration in May 2014. Numerous media reports have identified this Minister in
connection with different businesses in Sint Maarten. In an interview, the former
Minister confirmed to be part of a law firm. No business interests were noted on
the signed declaration form of this former Minister, as provided by the Ministry of
General Affairs. The declaration also had an accompanying letter submitted on a
letterhead from the former Minister’s law firm to the PM stating that the former
65
Minister held no business interests.
Recommendations Enforce penal provisions against Ministers who knowingly submit
false declarations and/or who are in non-compliance with the
provisions in the Integrity Ordinance. Publish appropriately redacted
incoming and exit declarations on the Fight Against Corruption
website. Consider amending existing legislation to require other
senior officials to submit asset declarations: According to Transparency
International,
“An asset declaration is a person’s balance sheet and should
cover assets, from all homes, valuables and financial
portfolios, to liabilities, such as debts and mortgages, and all
sources of income from directorships and investments to
consulting contracts. It should also include gifts and
sponsorship deals and any potential conflicts of interest such
as unpaid employment contracts and participation in non-
66
governmental organizations.”
Adjust the declaration form to be align with global standards and leading
practices. Asset declarations from Ministers who knowingly submitted incorrect
information should be subject to penal provisions. Declarations should be
submitted and reviewed by the Integrity Bureau according to the proposed
structure, rather than through the PM.
Asset declarations from officials who knowingly submitted incorrect information
should be subject to penal provisions. The Government should take the
administration of asset declarations seriously and under the Inquiry team’s
proposed revised structure, the Integrity Bureau should review declarations and
take appropriate measures based on information provided. Appropriately redacted
declarations should be made public to encourage transparency and accountability.
If Government officials do not declare within the allotted time prescribed by the
Integrity Ordinance, sanctions should be taken and information should be
published on the Fight Against Corruption website that that particular
Government official did not declare in time.
65
Minister Declaration and accompanying letter, May 2014
66
Best Practice for Asset Declarations, Transparency International;
http://www.transparency.org/news/feature/holding_politicians_to_account_asset_declarations
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
71

The following were identified as the key observations affecting the regulatory framework within the GoSM,
according to interviews conducted and documents analyzed by the Inquiry team:
 No Code of Conduct: The GoSM does not currently have a Code of Conduct for civil servants,
which is essential for good governance practices. The GoSM draft Code of Conduct has identifiable
gaps when compared with international standards which are recorded in Appendix E.
 No Government-wide conflict of interest policy or law: The GoSM does not have a
Government-wide conflict of interest policy or law, which is a cornerstone of good governance. The
potential for conflict of interest is high in Sint Maarten and no controls exist to avoid and resolve
these conflicts.
 Vague gift policy: Although the GoSM has a gift policy, it is imprecise and does not appear to be
properly monitored or enforced.
 Lack of guidance around policies and procedures: In some areas throughout Government,
policies are unclear, outdated, or conflict each other. Examples include the sick leave policy, public
transportation regulation, or study finance regulation. This policy confusion impacts the GoSM’s
ability to institute clear and effective good governance practices.
 Unclear and limited sanctioning authority of inspections/controls teams:
Inspections/controls teams appear to have limited authority to administer sanctions against
businesses or individuals who are in violation of policies and procedures resulting in minimal
incentives for businesses and individuals to comply with Government standards.
 Lack of due diligence for licensing casinos: The GoSM does not have any active regulatory
body to oversee those that own and operate casinos. The risk of organized crime infiltration is high,
especially in light of the fact that several reported organized crime figures have been linked in the
media and by law enforcement to casinos in Sint Maarten.
 No clear regulatory framework for licensing of brothel owners: Currently, brothels are
licensed under the same regulatory framework as hotels and adult entertainment establishments,
which does not account for the unique integrity risks and challenges associated with the sex industry,
such as organized human trafficking.
 Opportunities to abuse residency permit process: Possible loopholes exist in the regulatory
framework that could allow sex workers to circumvent six-month temporary residency permit by
applying for a Director's license.
 Lack of financial regulations for casinos: Sint Maarten’s casinos appear to operate without any
regulatory or financial oversight, creating vulnerability for money laundering and organized crime. It
does not appear that the GoSM has any insight into the financial results of casinos on the island.
Regulatory framework
No Code of Conduct
Observations No Code of Conduct for civil servants currently exists within the Government, but
the Ministry of General Affairs is in the process of drafting one. A Ministry of
General Affairs official provided the Inquiry team with a draft Code of Conduct
that the Government is “using right now but has to be officially enacted. We need
to look at it again and revise it again and then the PM will release it.” The draft
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
73

2. The public official should, in accordance with the law, report to
the competent authorities if he or she becomes aware of breaches
of this Code by other public officials.
3. The public official who has reported any of the above in
accordance with the law and believes that the response does not
meet his or her concern may report the matter in writing to the
relevant head of the public service.
4. Where a matter cannot be resolved by the procedures and
appeals set out in the legislation on the public service on a basis
acceptable to the public official concerned, the public official
should carry out the lawful instructions he or she has been given.
5. The public official should report to the competent authorities
any evidence, allegation or suspicion of unlawful or criminal
activity relating to the public service coming to his or her
knowledge in the course of, or arising from, his or her
employment. The investigation of the reported facts shall be
carried out by the competent authorities.
6. The public administration should ensure that no prejudice is
caused to a public official who reports any of the above on
70
reasonable grounds and in good faith.”
 Include a requirement to comply with the law and the expectation that
public officials will not use their position or influence while employed by the
Government to secure outside employment upon leaving office.
 Amend the Code of Conduct to align with global standards, which address
the need for public officials to conduct themselves in a manner which will
ensure the public trust. This should include activities that give the
appearance of impropriety.
 Revise the language in the Sint Maarten Code of Conduct to align to the
Council of Europe Model Code of Conduct, especially in the reporting of
gifts. Language around the acceptance of gifts in the Sint Maarten Code of
71
Conduct should be more specific.
 Adopt language from a Model Code of Conduct into the Sint Maarten Code
of Conduct around conflict of interest. Items addressed should include:
improper use by civil servants of their position to benefit their private
interest, disclosure of interests, and susceptibility to influence others.
 Adopt language from the Council of Europe Model Code of Conduct around
political or public activity. Draft measures regulating the political activities
of public officials; specifically the need for public officials to maintain
70
Code of Conduct Civil Servants Sint Maarten
71
Recommendation No. R (2000) 10 of the Committee of Ministers to Member states on codes of conduct for public officials, Council
of Europe; http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/monitoring/greco/documents/Rec(2000)10_EN.pdf
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
75

Introduce and enforce a Government-wide conflict of interest law
Recommendations
aligned to global standards and leading practices. Require immediate
reporting of a potential conflict of interest and require annual conflict
of interest declarations: Create a conflict of interest law that is applicable to all
personnel in the Government, and clearly define conflict of interest within the
policy. All personnel should be required to fill out a conflict of interest declaration
annually, with the potential exception of clerical personnel. A cost-effective, third-
party vendor could be selected for dissemination assistance to deploy online
declarations to all officials, regardless of rank. The law should be published on the
Government website and easily accessible to all employees. The law should contain
procedures for identifying, managing and resolving conflict of interest situations
and Government officials should be clear on the protocol to report a potential
conflict of interest. Employees should be required to fill out declarations annually
but should also be required to report a potential conflict of interest immediately
upon identification to a supervisor as well as the Integrity Bureau. Conflict of
interest declarations should be collected, analyzed, and monitored by the Integrity
Bureau, and specifically the commissioner overseeing policy. Data around the
distribution and collection of conflict of interest declarations should be
electronically stored in a central repository, and disciplinary action should be
taken against employees who do not complete the form on a timely basis.
Completion of the administration of conflict of interest declarations and the
introduction of the conflict of interest law should be communicated internally and
on the Fight Against Corruption website. Provide periodic training on the conflict
of interest law, and identify real-life, relevant conflict of interest situations that a
Government employee could be faced with and provide interactive training to all
officials on how to manage and resolve those conflict of interest situations.
The Inquiry team recognizes the challenges associated with conflict of interest in a
country the size of Sint Maarten – which is all the more reason for strict adherence
to a conflict of interest law. While the potential for a conflict of interest may be
unavoidable, there are many ways to manage the conflict appropriately to protect
the integrity of the decision-making body, which should be clearly defined for
Government employees. If a conflict of interest arises, disclosure should be made
and the decision-making power should be transferred from the related official to
an official who does not have a conflict of interest. Furthermore, the official with
the conflict should be kept out of meetings, discussions, and correspondence
related to the interest in order to avoid any exertion of influence over decision-
making. The official with the conflict should sign an “agreement not to act” which
the OECD defines as, “the individual agrees not to participate in any other action
73
concerning the interest, e.g. signing documents that relate to the interest).” In
some circumstances, it may be necessary for the official with the conflict of interest
to divest of the interest that is resulting in the conflict in order to maintain
integrity and independent decision-making.
73
Managing Conflict of Interest in the Public Service, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development;
https://web.archive.org/web/20140730221107/http://www.oecd.org/gov/ethics/48994419.pdf
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
77

get less. If they do bring gifts, we share or give it somewhere.
No one can take gifts individually.”
All of these statements are common problems within governments with low
maturity levels in “Code of Conflict” competence. It is essential that civil servants
raise their overall level of competence on how to manage routine, recurring and
basic conflict issues that arise commonly in daily relations. The questions posed
are easily addressed by well-trained advisors made available to assist civil servants
to advance their maturity in conflict management.
The regulations around the acceptance of gifts do not appear to be consistently
enforced. A senior VSA official stated that the Ministry of VSA instituted a “no gift
policy” separate, and more stringent than, the provisions in the LMA. When asked
how this policy is enforced, the senior official stated, “enforcement? You cannot
monitor gift policy unless have evidence that it has happened…the memo was just
a no gift policy but it cannot be enforced fully.”
Clear disciplinary sanctions are not articulated for those who violate the
acceptance of gift provisions of the LMA.
Giving gifts and political campaign contributions
Politicians giving what could appear to be a gift was also raised in interviews. A
senior official stated,
“every year I give money to my friends who have a cause
because I want to help to the community. But then when
elections come I keep giving them money because I have been
doing so all along – but is that bribing? What’s the difference?
We are all one community and everyone knows each other.”
Recommendations Create a gift acceptance and reporting policy aligned to global
standards and leading practices with provisions on accepting and
giving gifts. Clear guidelines and disciplinary sanctions should be
established for violation of the policy: Provide a clear definition of what
constitutes a gift and what gift thresholds are, including what gifts are deemed
“reportable gifts” for both the acceptance and giving of gifts. Reporting channels
should be clearly articulated, and officials should be required to report gifts that
are defined as “reportable gifts” within two weeks of receipt and should follow
policy protocol on how to handle the gift. The Integrity Bureau should maintain
the register of reportable gifts. Officials should also be held to strict guidelines on
the giving of gifts as a means to influence the public or decisions in other parts of
Government. Provide training around the gift policy including hypothetical
scenarios that public officials may face regarding the acceptance and giving of gifts
and hospitality and how to resolve those issues. Enforcement actions should be
taken in a timely manner against employees who give or accept gifts and
hospitality above the authorized threshold or who do not report gifts.
Regulatory framework
Lack of guidance around policies and procedures
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
79

A department head stated to the Inquiry team that members of their department
were frequently ill for two to three days at a time and then, having returned to
work, they would again report ill. The department head stated that this was
suspected abuse of the system as by coming in every few days, the employee is not
required by policy to report to SZV. The department head stated that there is “no
limit on sick days” and there is “no policy on the frequency of calling in sick”
making it difficult to enforce action against individuals who appear to be abusing
the system and also causing the department to lose productivity.
Lack of clarity around study financing regulations
Many interviewees cited confusion around study financing regulations. A Minister
stated,
“within my Ministry, I think there is a potential for us to fall
short on processes and procedures. I say that because what is
communicated by the person on the front line sometimes varies
and we are working very hard to synchronize this so we have
the same story on every issue. The place I see this as the biggest
issue is study financing. It could be because a number of the
people employed there are new so depending on who you meet,
you could get a completely different story on what to do. It is
not because there are no processes and procedures, it is because
there hasn’t been a big effort to train the people on the front line
to have the right story and be consistent. And this can lead to
people making bad decisions based on wrong information.
There is a part of the [study financing] regulation that says if
you arrive at the Study Financing office and 50% of documents
are not [contained in the application], the [Study Financing
Office is] supposed to give you three weeks to obtain those
documents. And the reason for that is because some of the
documents requested require information from other Ministries
such as a police record etc. which can sometimes take six-eight
weeks to obtain. And since I’ve been sitting here there have been
five people who have come to me saying that they couldn’t
submit their application because they were told they needed to
have everything [at the time they submit]. That is what I mean
when I say having different stories and it leads to having
integrity issues because information is incorrect. When you lead
the public in a wrong way, it is an integrity issue.”
Confusion on the collection of loan repayments related to study financing was also
discussed by Ministry of Finance and Ministry of OCJS officials in interviews with
the Inquiry team. The Ministry of Finance and Ministry of OCJS appear to have
disagreed on the correct legal basis for the collection of repayment loans which
resulted in the “return of 26 Advices.” A Ministry of OCJS official stated, “there is a
Study Financing Ordinance from the former Netherlands Antilles but we cannot
use it anymore because we are not affiliated with the Netherlands Antilles any
longer. It is valid until we have a new one.” Another official stated, “there is
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
81

Recommendations Take steps to update outdated regulation, create or clarify
implementing policies/procedures where necessary, and resolve
conflicting regulation issues: Specifically, create implementing
policies/procedures around public tendering, civil aviation, BTP payments, and
sick leave; update public transportation legislation; and clarify and adopt an
official study financing regulation. Conduct an assessment across departments to
identify where documented policy/procedure gaps exist or where confusion on
existing regulation exist and take swift action to remedy the gaps identified in
order to define clear standards under which Government employees operate.
Create a website similar to the P&O website
(http://pnobeleid.sharepoint.com/Pages/default.aspx) with interactive
information on all GoSM policies and procedures so that standards employees are
held to are easily accessible and explained clearly.
Regulatory framework
Unclear and limited sanctioning authority of inspections/controls teams
Observations Varying amounts of sanctioning power exist across inspections/controls teams
such as public health, food safety, VROMI, TEZVT and Labor.
For example, according to interviewees across Ministries, healthcare,
pharmaceutical, and food safety inspectors have adequate power within legislation
to administer sanctions. Labor and Economic inspectors/controllers on the other
hand appear to have minimal sanctioning power. At this time, no administrative
fines can be placed on businesses that are not compliant with Economic Affairs
and Labor policies, and the mechanism to levy sanctions is through the
Prosecutor’s Office, according to interviews with VSA and TEZVT employees. By
contrast, according to the National Ordinance Health Inspectorate, the Health
77
Inspectorate can impose administrative fines.
In order to issue an official report upon discovery of a violation, an inspector must
be appointed as an “extraordinary police officer.” Inspectors who are not
extraordinary police officers may only issue a warning letter. Some
inspections/controls teams are all extraordinary policeman, but the labor
department only has two, one of whom is on long term sick leave. Therefore, only
one labor inspector is able to issue an official report of a labor violation which
affects the efficiency of the team.
Since 10/10/10, only five businesses have been fined for employing illegal workers,
according to a VSA official. VSA officials cited that continuity in the Prosecutor’s
office made it difficult to get cases pushed through.
A senior Justice official stated,
“no [penalties are issued for clubs with illegal sex workers]. I
don’t hear that they get fined. Prosecutors never really fine
anyone. There is no incentive to not have illegal workers – that
is the real issue. There is no policy for shutting them down no
77
Landsverordening Inspectie voor de Volksgezondheid
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
83

While multidisciplinary inspections/controls teams already exist,
create an official policy mandating multidisciplinary teams to carry out
inspections/controls together: Mandating multidisciplinary teams will
encourage accountability for all team members to conduct adequate checks and
help deter illegal payments to be made to an individual inspector/controller.
Regulatory framework
Lack of due diligence for licensing casinos
Observations There have been several initiatives to regulate casinos, but presently a centralized
regulatory and oversight body does not exist in Sint Maarten, according to
interviews with Ministry of TEZVT officials. Currently, the GoSM has 15 casinos
operating on the island (10 stand alone and five associated with hotels). According
to officials in the Ministry of TEZVT, which is responsible for issuing casino
licenses, licenses are valid for five years, but none have been renewed since
October 10, 2010.
The GoSM’s casino policy, titled Rules of the Game, was passed in June 2011, and
contains measures in the application process for a “criminal and financial
78
background check” for Directors and shareholders. One license has been granted
since June 2011, according to documents provided by the Ministry of TEZVT, and
officials within the Ministry confirmed that screening of Directors and
shareholders had not been conducted retroactively for the remaining 14 casinos.
Several interviewees and press reports indicated that there were integrity issues
surrounding several individuals cited to be owners of casinos in Sint Maarten by
open sources and Ministry of Justice officials. The Inquiry team conducted due
diligence procedures for additional information. Many of the reported casino
owners appear to be known associates or members of well-established
international organized crime families, according to research of open sources and
syndicated global risk and compliance (“GRC”) databases. GRC databases are used
as an industry standard to identify government prohibited persons and entities,
terrorism, corruption, and money laundering subjects and data contained within
the databases is pulled from official government records and restricted entity
79
lists. Specific findings are as follows:
 One reported owner of a casino in Sint Maarten appeared in an INTERPOL
Red Notice for fraud, organized and transnational crime and was also
reportedly accused of providing false declarations, embezzlement,
corruption, forgery and money laundering, according to research of
syndicated global risk and compliance databases.
 Another reported casino owner was apparently linked to the Italian mafia
and has also been accused of money laundering.
78
Casino Policy: Rules of the Game, Government of Sint Maarten;
http://www.sintmaartengov.org/Policy%20and%20Reports/Rules%20of%20the%20Game%20Revised%202011.pdf
79
There is a regulatory expectation around the globe in many jurisdictions that GRC databases should be used for regulatory
compliance purposes and that positive findings from “GRC hits” be examined to determine whether any entities/individuals are
involved in prohibited or at risk transactions or behavior.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
85

expertise to conduct this analysis.
 A defined deposit or security down-payment: A deposit or down-
payment for each license to become active should be required.
 Accreditation procedures for all the gaming materiel the
applicant intends to use: This should be mandated for all gaming
material including tables, slots, cylinders, software, etc.
Initiate renewal process for casinos currently operating with expired
licenses. As part of renewal process, conduct criminal and financial
background checks of shareholders, owners and directors without
delay: The GoSM should immediately conduct appropriate due diligence to
determine whether casino owners, shareholders, directors, or managers are
associated with any criminal or integrity concerns. Shareholders, owners and
directors identified with adverse findings, including criminal behavior, should not
have their licenses renewed. Due diligence should be conducted by qualified third-
party vendors that have the requisite expertise to identify reputational, legal, and
commercial liabilities associated with individuals and businesses. Due diligence
screening should also be conducted as part of casino license application and
renewal processes.
Regulatory framework
No clear regulatory framework for licensing of brothel owners
Observations Currently, the GoSM oversees the prostitution sector, including the issuance of
licenses and work permits for commercial sex workers, through a patchwork of
different policies. According to sources in the Ministry of Justice, the act of
prostitution is permitted or not prohibited under domestic law but there is no legal
provision that permits or regulates a person or entity to operate a brothel. There is
no one specific license that allows an entity or individual to operate a brothel.
Instead, brothels are permitted to operate according to an unwritten rule that
requires each entity to have a set of licenses which combined, is sufficient to
operate a brothel. According to interviews with Ministry of TEZVT employees,
there are currently eight entities that have the set of licenses required to operate as
a brothel, and there is also a moratorium on the provision of the set of licenses
required to operate a brothel. It is unclear if background checks on owners and
Directors were completed when the original licenses were issued.
According to Government officials and business owners that were interviewed,
these entities allowed to operate as brothels typically recruit women from abroad
who work at the brothels and pay the owner a fee to live there.
Recently, there have been open source reports citing a new policy changing the
way the GoSM approaches both licensing and work permits for commercial sex
workers. On July 11, 2014, the Ministry of VSA published a Memorandum in
Regards to the Application of New Policy Processing Work Permits for Commercial
Sex Workers. This Memorandum can be described as an interim measure in
anticipation of a new commercial sex work policy. According to officials in the
Ministry of Justice, the official Government policy on commercial sex workers has
not yet been implemented.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
87

and underage prostitution.
 Formal guidelines for applying for a sex industry license, including
screening of applicants and mandatory disclosures to help prevent industry
83
capture by organized crime and human trafficking.
The GoSM should establish a Licensing Authority consistent with the themes
above. The GoSM has already begun to address licensing policy with the
establishment of the Justice Sex Workers Commission but that Commission has
not finalized any policy or implemented any prior recommendations from sex and
human trafficking assessments. The Licensing Authority should consist of the
Head of Immigration, Chief Inspector for Health, and Department and Head of
Economic Licenses. This Authority should be required to consult with the Chief of
Police and Chief Prosecutor before the issuance of any license for their advice and
recommendation. This Authority should also be empowered to review any existing
license applications for the proposed brothel licenses in Sint Maarten and conduct
appropriate due diligence procedures on established brothels and new businesses
that apply for brothel licenses. Further, the Authority could provide
recommendations concerning future prostitution policy and appropriate legislative
changes. In the event a Minister proposes to lift the moratorium on the licensing of
new brothels, the Minister should be required to seek advice from the Licensing
Authority regarding the economic need and public interest for an increase in
brothels.
Regulatory framework
Opportunities to abuse residency permit process
Observations It appears that immigrants may enter Sint Maarten through obtaining a Director’s
license from the Ministry of TEZVT instead of a work permit through the Ministry
of VSA, according to VSA officials. Immigrants can use a Director’s license as
means of gaining entry into the country but possibly never actually perform duties
for the company to which they claim to belong. Prior to 10/10/10 there was no
regulation limiting the number of Directors for a limited liability company
(“N.V.”). The GoSM recognized this loophole in the system and limited the number
of allowable foreign Directors for each company to two, according to Ministry of
TEZVT officials.
Interviewees also noted to the Inquiry team, however, that the process to establish
an N.V. in Sint Maarten is easy and that individuals already on the island can
establish N.V.s for the sole purpose of gaining residency permits for immigrants
who come in as Directors of those N.V.s.
Recommendations Establish control mechanisms to check validity of N.V.s: As previously
noted, third country nationals (“TCNs”) can use the Director’s licensing procedure
to bypass the work permit procedure to gain residency in Sint Maarten. TCNs,
including commercial sex workers, whose work permit is set to expire may also
attempt to remain in the country by obtaining a Director’s license.
83
Prostitution Licensing Authority Strategic Plan 2014-18, Queensland Government;
http://www.pla.qld.gov.au/Resources/PLA/reportsPublications/documents/strategicPlan.pdf
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
89

review compliance with reporting requirements of gaming revenue. These
procedures will not only help to reduce the risk of money laundering but identify
the appropriate amount of revenue subject to tax.
7.4. Investigations and enforcement
7.4.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading
86
practices
A strong investigative and enforcement apparatus is an essential element of a public integrity architecture.
The laws, policies, and regulations are only as effective as a government’s underlying ability to hold
individuals and companies accountable for transgressions. Absent enforcement, laws and regulations are
merely paper tigers incapable of detecting, punishing, or deterring integrity-related misconduct. In fact,
credible enforcement or the lack thereof is often highlighted in leading governance indices as a critical
driver of a government’s overall governance rating. For example, countries that score low on Transparency
International’s CPI are almost always noted for having low levels of enforcement, or enforcement actions
that are captured by the political process and not independent or credible. A credible, independent and
well-resourced enforcement capability cannot be emphasized enough in building a strong integrity
framework in Sint Maarten – in fact, it is a metric that receives a tremendous amount of attention from
external integrity rating agencies and local civil society organizations and must remain a top priority of the
GoSM. An effective investigative and enforcement apparatus should feature appropriate institutional
mechanisms to implement and enforce relevant laws and regulations, including:
 Specific law enforcement units that are responsible for investigating and prosecuting integrity-
related misconduct
 Appropriate measures to ensure the independence and autonomy of individuals and units
responsible for conducting investigations and prosecutions
 Adequate resources to allow for the thorough investigation and prosecution of integrity-related
misconduct, including personnel with specialized skills associated with detecting, investigating, and
prosecuting corruption and other financial crimes
 Clear guidelines and principles governing the initiation, suspension, and termination of
investigations and prosecutions
 Sufficient investigative and prosecutorial discretion that allows for the pursuit of law enforcement
activities without undue interference--or reliance on permission--from the executive branch.
 Ability of law enforcement authorities to obtain relevant information during an investigation,
including the authority to obtain witness statements, secure access to information from financial
institutions and tax authorities, and seize evidence and conduct reasonable searches (in line with
applicable domestic laws).
 Procedures for tracking, monitoring, and documenting the progress of investigations to ensure
efficient case management.
 Timely administrative, civil, or criminal actions undertaken in response to misconduct
 Effective communication protocols to ensure that relevant law enforcement authorities receive
whistleblower complaints and other information bearing on investigations and prosecutions
86
The key features related to Investigations and enforcement that are highlighted in this section represent an aggregation of
relevant guidance contained in the leading global standards and practices referenced in Appendix B.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
91

interest is particularly important for a small, close-knit island like Sint Maarten where real or
perceived bias can easily arise due to overlapping social, economic, and political relationships.
 Continuity and performance issues at the Prosecutor’s Office: The Prosecutor’s Office is
comprised of prosecutors from the Netherlands who complete short-term tours of duty in Sint
Maarten. The transient tenure of prosecutors often poses challenges since progress in many cases are
disrupted by the turnover in personnel and a lack of continuity. In addition, the short-term tours of
duty make it difficult for prosecutors to develop a strong understanding of the local culture and win
the trust and cooperation of community members.
 Inactivity of the MOT: The MOT has not been fully integrated into the enforcement framework in
the GoSM, and there is a marked lack of coordination with other enforcement bodies such as the
Prosecutor’s Office, National Detectives and the Police. As a result, the specialized knowledge and
financial analysis capabilities of the MOT is not properly utilized in preventing and prosecuting
corruption. Little action has been taken to address recommendations that have emerged from
previous assessments, such as the 2013 CFATF Mutual Evaluation Report.
 Lack of disciplinary action taken across departments: Interviewees noted to the Inquiry
team that internal disciplinary sanctions against employees for integrity violations were slow to be
taken and not frequently imposed, despite apparent evidence of wrongdoing and support for
sanctions from department heads and other senior officials.
 Lack of enforcement for commercial sex workers’ work permits: The GoSM does not
effectively monitor or oversee brothels to ensure that commercial sex workers do not overstay their
six month visas. A few proposed policies to improve GoSM performance in this regard have yet to be
implemented, and many sex workers continue to overstay their legal residency.
 Lack of resources for immigration enforcement: The GoSM estimates that there are at least
500 illegal immigrants. Although they have two mobile control units (“MCUs”) to combat illegal
immigration there is often inadequate cell space to house detainees and the MCUs do not have
adequate equipment (e.g. vehicles).
 Limited capacity to detect fraudulent documents: Fraudulent documents were observed to be
a common technique used by illegal immigrants to avoid detection. Although the GoSM has some
capacity to identify fraudulent documentation, there is a notable lack of sophistication in the training
and methodology used.
 Lack of resources to pursue human trafficking cases: GoSM is ranked as a tier two country
on the United States Department Human Trafficking Report and as such may not fully comply with
the Trafficking Victims Protection Act’s. There appears to be a lack of resources directed towards
efforts to combat human trafficking, especially in light of the heightened risk posed by the
commercial sex industry.
 Lack of training and technology in customs enforcement: The Customs Department is
hindered by a lack of advanced training and insufficient equipment, which compromises their ability
to safeguard Sint Maarten’s Harbour and Airport. Insufficient inspections may allow organized
criminal activity to proceed unchecked, including narcotics and human trafficking operations.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
93

corruption investigations to less significant cases involving problems with the
police force or other similar matters indicating that the detectives were not
sufficiently insulated from political pressures in the performance of their duty.
The original plan for the National Detectives called for 16 full time equivalents
90
(“FTEs”) with the potential for 4 more FTEs (20 total). Officials from the
Ministry of Justice informed the Inquiry team that the National Detectives
currently consists of only 11 individuals: one Department Head, five tactical
detectives, two team leaders, and three support staff. Although staffing in the
National Detectives remains low, the Minister of Justice has recently authorized
the hiring of four FTEs before December 2014, four additional FTEs in 2015, and
additional recruitment as needed thereafter until the maximum of 20 FTEs is
91
reached.
While the authorization provided by the Ministry of Justice to augment the staff of
the National Detectives is a welcome development, it remains to be seen whether
the National Detectives will be able to identify and recruit appropriately qualified
candidates in a timely manner. Special hiring of expatriates or foreign nationals
with a high level of forensics skills may be considered to augment the National
Detectives as a “technical branch” that provides supporting forensic services.
In addition to a lack of qualified personnel, senior Justice officials noted that the
National Detectives does not have adequate supplies such as printers and copy
machines to appropriately prepare dossiers for prosecutors, which is a critical step
in ensuring that a prosecution will move forward. The lack of basic computer
equipment is another area that can be immediately remediated by the Government
and presents an opportunity for the GoSM to demonstrate its commitment to
improving its enforcement capacity.
Lack of standardized, effective anti-corruption training
A lack of standardized formal forensic training may compromise the effectiveness
of the National Detectives. Senior officials from the Ministry of Justice and other
agencies informed the Inquiry team that current members of the National
Detectives have primarily received on-the-job training. Some of this training is
augmented through guidance provided by an experienced detective from the
Kingdom who visits Sint Maarten for approximately three months every year to
“twin” or guide local detectives through investigative procedures. While on-the-job
experience is an invaluable method for acquiring critical investigative skills, it
should not be considered a substitute for a formal training program. A
standardized training program tailored to the specific function of the National
Detectives is critical to promote quality and consistency in the work performed by
investigators. For example, foreign governments allied with Sint Maarten have
exchange and training programs wherein foreign law enforcement personnel are
trained at national academies of excellence. The Inquiry team was aware of at least
one member of the Justice Ministry who was trained at the FBI center in Quantico,
90
Development Plan for the National Detectives Unit
91
Information provided to the Inquiry team by the National Detectives.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
95

and complexity of the cases handled by the National Detectives, it was not possible
to draw any conclusions as to whether the performance of the National Detectives
was in line with what would be expected of a similarly situated investigative team.
Second, the Inquiry team noted the lack of a comprehensive strategy document
that articulates short or long-term goals or enforcement priorities for the National
Detectives. Consequently, it appears that the National Detectives is a reactionary
force responding to information and complaints as they arise and does not
currently have a plan to prioritize or strategically allocate resources to certain
high-risk areas. The lack of an overarching enforcement strategy could undermine
the effectiveness of the National Detectives, particularly in light of the resource
constraints discussed in the previous section.
Third, the Inquiry team observed a lack of coordination between the National
Detectives and the Public Prosecutor’s Office in basic case management. The
National Detectives informed the Inquiry team that over 80% of corruption cases
are completed and ready for prosecution, while the Public Prosecutor’s Office
indicated to the Inquiry team that many of these same cases were not ready for
presentation in Court and much work remained to be done. According to
interviews with senior Justice officials, the Prosecutor’s Office does not always
coordinate closely with the National Detectives, and at times discounts
information provided by the National Detectives. The lack of coordination and
cooperation between the National Detectives and the Prosecutor’s Office could
have a significant impact on the performance of the National Detectives going
forward and is an issue that should be addressed at the operational level by
encouraging informal communications between detectives and prosecutors.
Fourth, the Inquiry team noted that many investigations may be hindered by the
reluctance of key witnesses to cooperate with the National Detectives due to a lack
of anonymity protections. According to senior Justice officials, witnesses are
hesitant to “officially” cooperate with the National Detectives upon realizing that
their identity would be revealed during the course of a criminal investigation. The
Inquiry team was informed by senior Justice officials that the fear of retaliation in
the workplace may prevent many witnesses from providing information to the
National Detectives. This difficulty in securing witness cooperation could
substantially slow the progress of investigations and even lead to otherwise valid
cases being dropped.
Recommendations Increase skilled staff in National Detectives in line with mandate
provided by the Minister of Justice: The limited availability of skilled
forensic investigators within the National Detectives poses a substantial challenge
for law enforcement efforts. Bottlenecks in the workflow of the National Detectives
are not infrequent due to staffing issues, and the capacity of the unit to conduct
multiple investigations simultaneously is fairly limited. The Minister of Justice has
authorized additional hiring (up to 20 full-time staff), and the National Detectives
should expedite the search for qualified candidates, with a particular emphasis on
recruiting personnel with strong Dutch language skills and experience conducting
financial investigations.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
97

According to interviews conducted by the Inquiry team with Ministry of Justice
officials and civil society stakeholders, there is a perception that the delay in
opening a criminal investigation may be due to the relationship that a senior
Justice official has with the family of the individual who would be the subject of
94
the investigation – a relationship the official acknowledged. Whether or not this
relationship has had a material impact on the decision to launch a criminal
investigation is largely irrelevant and not the focus of our Inquiry. The key issue is
that in a society as closely connected as Sint Maarten, the perception of bias can
easily arise and is just as damaging to public trust in Government as actual bias.
Establishing, and enforcing, clear conflict of interest guidelines that would, in this
instance, require the senior Justice official to relinquish their role in an
investigation involving a personal contact could mitigate the perception of bias
that was expressed by the Justice officials interviewed.
Recommendations Develop clear conflict of interest guidelines to prevent real or
perceived conflicts from emerging in the judicial system: The apparent
lack of formal conflict of interest guidelines and recusal procedures for justice
officials presents a notable integrity risk. Such conflict of interest guidelines are
particularly important in small countries like Sint Maarten where tightly-knit
social, economic, and political networks can easily interfere with the independence
of justice officials. Guidelines should require a conflict of interest analysis to
identify potential conflicts or bias and deploy special external (i.e. off-island)
prosecutors when needed to manage investigations that cannot be credibly
95
conducted by local personnel.
Investigations and enforcement
Continuity and performance issues at the Prosecutor’s Office
Observations The Public Prosecutor’s Office is the organization that brings suspects to the
criminal court. The Public Prosecutor’s role is to assure that criminal offenses are
96
investigated and prosecuted. The proper exercise of prosecutorial discretion
often requires the consideration of a broad range of factors, including local
context and culture. The decision to allocate scarce resources to prosecute one
case over another may hinge on subtle policy issues, such as the relative priority
of addressing one type of misconduct over another within a community. Not all
communities will have the same priorities or needs, and it is important that
prosecutors have a strong understanding of the community in which they operate.
While many of the individuals in the Public Prosecutor’s Office have adequate
experience--most prosecutors have between two and ten years of relevant
experience in the Netherlands--there did not appear according to senior law
enforcement authorities interviewed by the Inquiry team, to be very strong ties
between prosecutors and the local community. According to officials in the
94
The senior official acknowledged a relationship with the family in an interview with the Inquiry team, however indicated that it has
not affected any decisions in the case.
95
The importance of independent special prosecutors is highlighted in Article 36 of the United Nations Convention Against
Corruption.
96
Openbaar Ministerie; http://www.openbaarministerie.org/en/
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
99

prosecution order is issued by the Court, which in turn relies on a requisition of
97
the Attorney General. According to senior Justice officials this process delays
law enforcement officials from gathering information through search warrants
and wiretaps until such an order can be obtained from a Court, which often may
result in notice being given to a suspect.
Overall, the Inquiry team noted that all the relevant stakeholders consulted
during the course of the Inquiry recognized the need for quicker resolution of
cases and expressed their interest in finding ways to improve the current process.
This included the willingness by some of those interviewed to open their
investigative files to external review to determine if all possible steps were being
taken to bring those accused to justice.
Recommendations Deploy and launch a special investigative and prosecutor task force
with cooperation from the Netherlands to help clear the backlog of
widely-known corruption cases. The task force’s focus should be to
process the backlog of corruption cases and demonstrate the
commitment by the GoSM to resolving these public scandals: Seek to
enhance GoSM’s credibility to actively prosecute existing cases thereby
reinforcing the earlier recommendation to promote the Fight Against Corruption
campaign.
Lengthen term of prosecutors to encourage continuity and local
understanding: Prosecutors completing two year rotations in Sint Maarten
often do not have the opportunity to build strong ties to the community, which
can undermine their legitimacy and ability to win the trust and cooperation of
local residents. The term should be extended to five years to allow prosecutors to
complete cases and integrate and better understand the local culture.
Furthermore, efforts should be made to identify and recruit qualified prosecutors
who have existing ties to the community or are able to invest in building local
relationships and credibility.
Establish a specialized Anti-Corruption/Organized Crime Task Force
within the Prosecutor’s Office: This task force should include the head of the
National Detectives, Attorney General, and Chief of Police and coordinate closely
with the head of MOT. The primary objective of this task force should be to
facilitate closer relationships among the different law enforcement and justice
departments by serving as a coordinating body for anti-corruption investigations
and prosecutions.
Institute independent file reviews and specialized support of
corruption and complex cases with an experienced cadre of
prosecutors: Due to the unique characteristics of Sint Maarten and the high risk
of conflicts of interest, the Attorney General in conjunction with the Minister of
Justice should identify and maintain experienced regional and international
prosecutors familiar with the Dutch legal system who are available to provide
specialized support and file reviews of high profile and complex corruption cases.
97
Landsverordening Vervolging Politieke Gezagdragers
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
101

interviewees.
Another key finding of the CFATF report is related to casinos, one of the
vulnerable industries in Sint Maarten. The report states:
“There is no comprehensive regulatory and supervisory
AML/CFT regime in Sint Maarten for casinos; however the
Examiners were advised that within the Government there has
been discussion regarding the creation of a Gaming Control
Board. There are no AML/CFT requirements for internet
casinos. It is to be noted that thresholds for casinos do not
103
comply with the thresholds set by FATF.”
Recommendations Address the recommendations contained in the 2013 CFATF Mutual
Evaluation Report on Sint Maarten: The report prepared by CFATF provided
a summary of key recommendations to strengthen the AML/CFT framework in
Sint Maarten, which were developed in line with leading global standards. The
Inquiry team endorses the findings in the 2013 CFATF report and urges the
Government to implement the recommendations contained therein.
Facilitate greater coordination between the Police, Prosecutor’s Office,
and the MOT by including MOT personnel in regularly scheduled joint
meetings: Successful investigations and prosecutions of financial crimes require
close cooperation between intelligence gathering and law enforcement functions.
The MOT should be seamlessly integrated into the workflow of the National
Detectives, Police and Prosecutor’s Office when needed. Efforts should be made to
promote formal and informal links between MOT personnel and law enforcement
personnel, including through regular meetings.
Investigations and enforcement
Lack of disciplinary action taken across departments
Observations Based on interviews and documents obtained, disciplinary sanctions are not
imposed in an efficient manner in cases involving dereliction of duty. According to
a senior Ministry of General Affairs official,
“Decisions are not taken when disciplinary measures have to be
taken. I think the reason for this is that the Minister does not
want to be placed in a negative light, if you put your foot down,
reprimand someone for doing something wrong, you are a bad
guy, you get less votes.”
A senior official at VSA stated to the Inquiry team, “you cannot get rid of someone
who is a civil servant, forget it.”
The authority to impose disciplinary sanctions is regulated in Article 86 of the
LMA as follows:
1. “The competent authority may impose disciplinary sanctions on
a civil servant who fails to comply with the obligations imposed
103
Id.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
103

without stamping their passport for a fee. The senior official stated to the Inquiry
team that they began the case for dismissal by issuing letters to the employee, and
notifying the Minister and the SG. The employee has not yet been terminated (as
of March 2014). According to the senior official, the employee is still on the payroll
of their department. The senior official stated that there are three people on their
department’s payroll who they had not seen “since [they] started” and four people
on the department’s payroll that work elsewhere including the cabinet of the
Minister. When asked how this was possible the senior official stated, “I don’t
make ultimate decision on this – it is the Minister and cabinet of advisors.”
A former department head reported direct knowledge of inspectors receiving gifts
or being taken out to lunch or “receiving money from people to do an inspection
faster or pass the inspection.” In those cases, no disciplinary action was taken
against these staff members, according to the official. The official did state to the
Inquiry team that as a result of this incident, the inspections/controls department
implemented follow-up checks, where a second inspections team is sent in to
verify the findings of an initial inspection. The official was unsure if the
implementation of follow-up checks still exists and whether or not it improved the
level of integrity.
Another instance cited by multiple officials was an account of an inspector who
was videotaped accepting bribes in a supermarket prior to carrying out the
inspection. The inspector was terminated, according to officials who were directly
involved in the dismissal of this employee. An official stated that they felt this
inspector was terminated because the inspector in this instance was videotaped
and could not deny the claims.
Finally, an official reported direct knowledge of a case involving an inspector who
was identified to be performing work as a consultant for the same company they
were inspecting and was reported to be billing the company for the consulting
work while carrying out inspections. This inspector was reported by the official to
still currently be on GoSM payroll but has not been working since “June of last
year.”
Documentation regarding four disciplinary action cases involving integrity
breaches was provided to the Inquiry team by civil servants directly involved in
each case. Dismissal or severe disciplinary action is still pending in all four cases,
according to interviewees.
107
Disciplinary action case example #1
November 2011: Customer Complaint
A warning letter was issued to an employee in November 2011 stating that a
customer complaint had been filed citing an incident of sexual harassment
between the employee and a client who visited the Government department. The
warning letter states that the customer’s complaint was shared with the employee
in a meeting which they had with Ministry employees including the department
107
Based on documents provided by various Ministries
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
105

September 2012: Disciplinary Advice
A disciplinary action Advice was issued by the Ministry regarding the employee in
late September 2012. The employee was accused of sexual harassment against a
coworker and a statement from them was included that indicated that their actions
were meant as a joke. The document cites two previous cases of similar activity
against two female coworkers. The Advice for punishment of one week without pay
is approved by the Minister.
February 2013: Planning Interview
Documentation from an Individual Performance Contract Planning Interview from
February 2013 cites information that the employee shared with their department
head their plans for bringing in ‘girls’ for several clubs on the island, primarily
from Venezuela and Dominican Republic. According to the Planning Interview
document, the employee gave extensive information on this, including the
transport of girls via Anguilla and also indicated that other clubs sign for these
girls and they end up at a different club when they are ‘ill-treated’. The employee
was advised that this matter would be escalated to P&O for further investigation,
with an indication that this was not approved in the past or currently. The
document was signed by the employee, section head, and head of department.
February 2013: Letter to the Governor
A letter from the Minister was issued to the Governor of Sint Maarten in February
2013. The letter charged the employee with sexual harassment against a coworker,
following a complaint and recommends the disciplinary punishment of
withholding a week of salary. The letter also stated that the punishment will not
come into effect until the employee has the opportunity to formally respond to the
charge.
March 2013: Disciplinary Action Advice
An Advice for disciplinary action to be taken against the employee is issued by the
Ministry in March 2013. The employee was accused of the following actions and
recommended for termination:
 September 2011 – reportedly told a client she looked good and ask if she was
interested to work in a brothel.
 August 2012 – reportedly told a coworker that they wanted to put whipped
cream on her toes and lick it off.
 Planning discussion 2013 – reportedly admitted that in addition to their
official work as an administrative employee, the employee was engaged in
secondary activities as a liaison for an unregistered brothel in the Dutch
Quarter that were not approved and likely illegal.
The letter states that the National Detectives will perform an investigation into the
possible illegal activities surrounding the brothel.
March 2013: Letter from the Governor to the Employee
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
107

in August, pending the outcome of the investigation by the National Detectives.
The following is outlined in the Advice as issues around the employee that were
discovered through interviews with individuals who interacted directly with the
employee:
1. “Improper behavior towards clients and personnel (cursing; improper
behavior – kicking shoes through the office in the presence of clients;
knocking office equipment, including electronics, off desks etc.
2. Performing actions against section procedures and regulations, sometimes
directly or indirectly placing personnel in liability issues (giving away copies
of clients’ documents, issuing registration cards without receiving payment
and having inspections performed etc.
3. Informing clients of loopholes and regulations, and benefitting family and
friends in the process
4. Suspicion of corruption by receiving and asking moneys from clients
5. Conflict of interest (receiving money from clients to pay the registration fee
on their behalf)
6. Suspicion of being intoxicated while at work.”
The Advice also includes that the employee provided third parties with
information containing confidential client information on two occasions. “Another
serious offence” was also discovered in September 2012. The employee was not
following the certification procedure and that registration certificates were being
issued for commercial vessels “without proof of inspection and payment being
present.” An attached witness statement report includes testimony about the
employee from multiple colleagues. One witness stated in the report, “I have never
seen [the employee] take money from clients, but I am very suspicious that it does
happen. I have however seen [the employee] with money from clients who [the
employee] took money from to go and pay for their registration. The witness also
stated in the report that the employee referred clients who were not eligible for
registration to a “lady to still get their boats registered. People often call for this
lady at the office thinking that she works for us.” The witness stated in the report
that the employee used their “sister, who is part of a notary, [X], in order to
arrange for [clients] to have a link to Sint Maarten, as this is one of the
requirements for registration.”
A list of 33 certificates issued without performing an inspection or collecting
payment was reviewed by the Inquiry team. Most of these 33 certificates were
divided between three companies: 17 to one, and six and five to the other two.
October 2013: Referral to National Detective
In October 2013, a letter from the department head was sent to the National
Detective asking the National Detective to investigate the following suspicions of
the employee:
 “Receive money for issuing certificates ‘Bribery’
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
109

competent authority, suspension is called for in the interests of the service.” Article
94 of the LMA does not require that employees receive payment during suspension
under Article 92 sub c.
According to officials in General Affairs and the related Ministry, the employee is
still on payroll and receiving full salary. The Inquiry team confirmed this through
payroll documentation from March 2014 provided by the Ministry of General
Affairs. An official from the related Ministry stated that a replacement was not able
to be hired because the employee was still on payroll, and the department is
therefore currently very short-staffed and unable to effectively carry out its
function.
110
Disciplinary Action Case Example #3
August 2013: Department Head Letter
A letter was issued by a department head regarding alleged violations of conflict of
interest law for an employee working in the labor inspectorate and reportedly
“submitting and assisting clients (businesses) with employment permit
applications through [their own] business” located on a prominent street in
Phillipsburg. A report was made including names of clients that the employee
submitted applications for and states that the employee’s activities date back to “at
least April 2013.” The letter states that the “additional job” constitutes a “serious
conflict of interest” and is “harmful to the independent, objective and trustworthy
reputation” of departments in the Ministry. According to the letter, the employee
was instructed previously by the SG to submit a declaration form on activities,
which was not completed. The letter finds the employee in violation of Article 52
and 86 of the LMA.
Article 52 states,
A civil servant shall not perform any secondary activities as a
result of which good performance of the relevant position or
good operations of the relevant service cannot or can no longer
reasonably be assured. The civil servant who performs or is to
perform secondary activities shall notify the head of his service
of this in writing.
Article 86 states,
The competent authority may impose disciplinary sanctions on
a civil servant who fails to comply with the obligations imposed
on him or neglects his duties in other ways. Neglect of duty
covers both the infringement of any rules and action or
omissions that a good civil servant should not take or make in
111
similar circumstances.
110
Based on documents provided by various Ministries
111
Landsverordening Materieel Ambtenarenrecht
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
111

4,300 without approval or permission from the Executive Council or Director
of Resource. Open source information appears to link an individual with the
publishing and destination management companies, and this individual was
reported in many firsthand accounts to be in a close personal relationship with
the department head.
 IT contracts: The department head co-organized payments of USD 16,608
for computers, iPads and other related items to what appears to be an IT
company. The purchase included 15 iPads, which could not be accounted for,
according to the report. The report also notes that the purchase of computers
and IT equipment must be approved by the Information and Communications
Technology (“ICT”) section head and that the Government office must always
receive advanced approval from the Executive Council and in this case the ICT
department, which was not obtained. The report further states that the
Government office, through its US affiliate, paid ANG 107,008 to an individual
between 2009 and June 2010 without necessary approval from the ICT
department or Executive Council.
Other payments identified in the undated internal investigation report include:
 Christmas food costs paid to a restaurant via the Government Office US
Affiliate for USD 2,544 without permission
 Travel made by the department head’s colleague to Panama in October 2010
via Aruba without permission, also paid by the Government Office US Affiliate
 Travel made by the department head without permission form the Executive
Council that cost USD 3,900
 Presentations and food paid without permission that cost ANG 156,047
 ANG 61,734 paid by the Government Office US Affiliate to the Westin Hotel
114
without permission
The report concludes that a total of ANG 875,911 was identified to have been paid
out without approval from the Director of Resource or the Executive Council.
Additionally, unauthorized commitments of ANG 257,929 still needed to be paid
(at the time of the report), according to the report. The total amount of
unauthorized payments was reported as ANG 1,133,840 (875,911 + 257,929).
The two employees were temporarily suspended in November 2010. In December
2010, a Minister withdrew the suspension of the department head and colleague,
115
“on the basis of insufficient grounds/lack of evidence.” The department head is
currently an executive at a SoC and an investigation is ongoing, according to
Ministry of Justice officials. Other than temporary suspension, no other
disciplinary sanction was placed against either employee, according to a Ministry
of General Affairs official.
114
Undated internal investigation report
115
Open source media report, December 2010
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
113

the commercial sex workers. Although there is currently a process in place to fine
business owners that are employing illegal immigrants, fines are rarely levied on
businesses upon discovery of illegal commercial sex workers, according to Ministry
of Justice, VSA, and TEZVT officials.
Recommendations Building on the informal multidisciplinary inspection/control teams
already in place, formalize a Prostitution Inspection Task Force: The
GoSM should inspect brothels to measure compliance with existing immigration
and health concerns and to identify possible instances of human trafficking.
Importantly, this Task Force should be empowered to impose sanctions for non-
compliance. The proposed Task Force should have authority to issue fines and
further action if needed in instances of non-compliance with policies and
procedures governing commercial sex workers.
This Task Force should be comprised of members from the Ministries of VSA,
TEZVT and Justice. All three of these Ministries have a role in the regulation of
prostitution industry. This Task Force should work closely with the
interdepartmental licensing authority to advise on improvements in the current
regulatory mechanism.
Investigations and enforcement
Lack of resources for immigration enforcement
Observations An overall lack of enforcement was identified regarding foreign nationals residing
in Sint Maarten illegally. A Ministry of Justice official estimated that there are
more than 5,000 illegal immigrants; however, a 2014 US Department of State
Trafficking in Persons report estimates that the number may be as high as
117
30,000.
Immigration control and enforcement in Sint Maarten is performed by two MCUs,
and the GoSM Immigration department in the Ministry of Justice is, according to
Justice officials, only two years old. The primary responsibility of the two units is
to identify, locate and apprehend immigrants who are in non-compliance with the
GoSM’s residency requirements. A Ministry of Justice employee indicated that the
units “bring in people but nothing happens.” The interviewee further stated that
the teams have to rent cars in order to support their operations, and that the team
needs twice the number of cars in order to effectively complete their objectives.
Ministry of Justice officials also stated the need for training for MCU staff.
Lack of prison space
Foreign nationals in non-compliance with residency requirements who are
arrested and detained are frequently released back into the community due to a
lack of holding cell space. According to Ministry of Justice officials, foreign
nationals often fail to appear for deportation proceedings and a lack of resources
appear to make it difficult for immigration personnel to locate and apprehend
these individuals again. This lack of cell space appears to significantly undermine
the arrest and apprehension process.
117
2014 Trafficking in Persons Report, US Department of State; http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/226848.pdf
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
115

Recommendations Enhance skill set of residency office staff to detect fraudulent
documents: The GoSM should assess the staff’s level of capacity to detect
fraudulent documents and provide training where needed. The ability to detect
fraudulent documents can help confirm that residency and work permit offices are
obtaining valid information on immigrants when they enter Sint Maarten.
Investigations and enforcement
Lack of resources to pursue human trafficking cases
Observations Human trafficking was described to the Inquiry team by a Ministry of Justice
official as a “prevalent problem” that the Ministry of Justice does not adequate
have resources to combat. A Ministry of Justice official also reported that it is in
possession of “quite a lot of information” from old investigations, wiretaps and
informants but there is “no follow-up capacity” or experience in solving these types
of cases.
According to the U.S. State Department’s 2014 Trafficking in Persons, Sint
Maarten is classified with Tier 2 status which applies to “countries whose
governments do not fully comply with the Trafficking Victims Protection Act’s
(“TVPA”) minimum standards, but are making significant efforts to bring
119
themselves into compliance with those standards.” The TVPA’s minimum
standards provide guidelines for governments to implement a program aimed at
eliminating human trafficking.
The U.S. State Department report further estimates that there could be as many as
15,000 people working as forced labor in Sint Maarten, and also notes the
dependency by sex workers on brothel and strip club owners to obtain work
permits.
Recommendations Increase number and quality of resources to effectively combat
potential human trafficking: Place additional resources to allow police and
prosecutors to initiate investigations against suspected traffickers. The Ministry of
Justice should also provide training to police regarding the investigation of human
trafficking crimes. The GoSM should work to align its anti-human trafficking
framework to the TVPA’s Minimum Standards for the Elimination of Trafficking.
Investigations and enforcement
Lack of training and technology in customs enforcement
Observations Customs were traditionally managed by officials of the Netherlands Antilles
located in Curacao, and consequently the Sint Maarten Customs department has
had to start anew after 10/10/10. The Customs department currently has 11
employees and is responsible for control of goods at the Airport, Harbour and the
borders. According to Custom officials there is a department head, one assistant,
and one team leader at the Airport, Harbour and detective division. In a highly-
publicized incident in 2014, two senior customs officials were arrested for
participating in large scale narcotics trafficking scheme. This incident called into
question the integrity of the Customs department and had an adverse impact on its
119
2014 Trafficking in Persons Report, U.S. Department of State; http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/226848.pdf
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
117

7.5. Procurement
7.5.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading
120
practices
Government procurement constitutes a major portion of public expenditure. Policies, procedures, and
internal controls should be in place as a part of an effectively designed procurement system in order to
support procurement objectives and prevent, detect or mitigate the risks of fraud, corruption, waste and
abuse.
Procurement procedures that are aligned to global standards – such as the Model Law on Public
Procurement from the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (Model Law) and
Guidelines for Internal Control Standards for the Public Sector from the International Organization of
Supreme Audit Institutions – in design and execution can help:
 Provide structure and oversight for procurement processes to achieve specified objectives, mitigate
potential risks, and support the execution of “orderly, ethical, economical, efficient and effective
operations” (INTOSAI GOV 9100).
 Promote transparency, accountability, objectivity, and consistency across procurement activities.
 Protect public funds from misuse (whether from fraud, corruption, waste or abuse), so that such
funds can be used for their intended purposes, in accordance with laws and regulations.
For example, a detailed set of regulations, policies and internal controls establish a structured process for
procurement and provide safeguards against improper conduct, while monitoring mechanisms promote
compliance with procurement regulations and guidelines.
In order to assess the integrity architecture related to procurement processes, the Inquiry team analyzed
applicable legislation, formal guidance, and interviewed a number of civil servants involved in these areas.
7.5.2. Observations and recommendations
A structured set of regulations, policies and internal controls is essential in government procurement to
provide adequate safeguards to prevent, detect, and mitigate fraud, corruption, waste and abuse. The
Inquiry team found that the maturity of the GoSM’s procurement framework is low as compared to global
standards based primarily on the lack of a National Decree containing general measures that provides a
clear set of guidelines and expectations regarding public tenders. In addition, the reliance on an internal
control framework that is based on customary informal practices that are not applied consistently across
Government agencies and departments contributes to a weak maturity level as well as insufficient
safeguards to prevent public expenditures that deviate from established budgetary priorities and
constraints.
The following were identified as the key observations affecting procurement within the GoSM, according to
interviews conducted and documents analyzed by the Inquiry team:
 Lack of formal public tender procedures: While certain elements of an effective procurement
system exist, there are opportunities to formalize existing protocols to strengthen and better align
120
The key features related to Procurement that are highlighted in this section represent an aggregation of relevant guidance
contained in the leading global standards and practices referenced in Appendix B.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
119

sometimes “split up” in order to avoid public tender procedures per bid – e.g.,
procurement for goods/services totaling ANG 90,000 may be split up into two
bids of ANG 45,000 in order to avoid the public tender threshold of ANG 50,000.
Government officials may be induced to split bids by bribes/kickbacks from a
favored bidder. The manipulation of public tenders and favoritism undermine a
nation’s efforts to maintain transparency and competition throughout the public
procurement process.
Inconsistent implementation of public tender exemptions
The National Accountability Ordinance (Article 47.4) allows the Government to
deviate from the requirement to issue a public tender if immediate procurement is
needed following a national disaster or if issuing a public tender is against the
‘general interest’. Official Government figures indicate that this exemption was
requested an average of forty-five times per year in the period between 2011 and
June 2014. While Article 47.4 contains a control mechanism, whereby the Minister
of Finance presents a draft National Decree to the Governor for signing, to verify
the validity of the use of the exemption prior to its use, this control mechanism
does not appear to be executed as designed. For example, according to figures
obtained from the Government, it appears that at least 40% of these exemption-
related National Decrees may not have reached the Governor for signing until after
the procurement was made. Excessive use of sole sourcing based on general
interest exemption or other distinctive criteria may be a red flag for corruption and
a well-functioning oversight mechanism would enhance the scrutiny that is placed
on “emergency” or “general interest” exemptions to public tenders. The use of such
exemptions should be directed by pre-established guidance and controls.
Inconsistent procedure of public notice
A leading practice in the public procurement process is to issue a publicized notice
about the public tender, which promotes transparency and competition among
potential vendors. Without a public notice, well-qualified vendors may not be
aware of the need for their services, thus depriving the Government of the
opportunity to acquire quality goods and services at the most competitive prices.
According to discussions with various civil servants, while the Ministry of VROMI
has a practice of announcing public tenders in national newspapers, other
Ministries do not have a consistent procedure for issuing public notices prior to
public tenders.
Recommendations Pass a National Decree containing general measures on public
procurement: Legislation that provides further guidance on the execution of
public tenders would strengthen Sint Maarten’s public tender process and promote
fair competition, transparency, and value for money. A well designed National
Decree containing general measures on public tenders would be expected to
contain guidance on what is considered an individual procurement to which the
thresholds above must be applied or a specific article that forbids dividing
procurement into smaller increments in order to avoid a public procurement. The
Model Law on Public Procurement can provide a starting point and accelerator for
Sint Maarten’s National Decree containing general measures on public
procurement. There are several internationally recognized standard contracts (e.g.,
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
121

invoice matches the price on the purchase order. However, without a formalized
document that states these obligations, the recipient may not be aware that these
conditions should be met prior to signing off on an invoice. Based on discussions
with various civil servants, it appears that, in certain cases, invoices may have been
approved for payment by individuals who had no means of verifying whether or
not the goods or services were indeed received. The individuals indicated that they
rely on the department that ordered the goods/service to provide this verification,
as is normal business practice; however, given the lack of formal internal control
procedures, there are concerns that such verification that the procedures may not
be performed or that they may be performed, but not documented/ communicated
to the individuals approving invoices for payment.
Recommendations Formalize procurement processes and strengthen internal controls:
Formalized procurement processes and strong internal controls help provide
transparency, support competition, and safeguard Government resources. An
effectively designed and executed system of internal controls will provide stability
to the procurement system and promote compliance with laws and regulations, it
may also identify efficiencies to be gained throughout the process.
The Inquiry team encourages the Ministry of Finance to continue its efforts in
completing and formalizing the procurement process and related internal controls,
with support and buy-in from representatives of the other Ministries.
Strengthening the design of the procurement process and internal controls may
help alleviate the workload of the civil servants involved in the procurement
process through an appropriate delegation of duties and authorities.
Based on interviews and documents examined there is limited verification during
the procurement process. Often there is no explicit confirmation that verifies if
goods received match the quantity of goods ordered and if the invoice received is
in line with the number of goods received and priced according to the purchase
order. The Inquiry team, therefore, recommends that the new internal controls
include sufficient verification of transactions as these were found to be missing
throughout the Government. According to the INTOSAI leading practices, proper
verification is as follows:
“Transactions and significant events are verified before and
after processing, e.g. when goods are delivered, the number of
goods supplied is verified with the number of goods ordered.
Afterwards, the number of goods invoiced is verified with the
number of goods received. The inventory is verified as well by
performing stock-takes.”
The diligent implementation of the soon-to-be formalized procure-to-pay process
is important to embed appropriate procurement procedures across the
Government. The implementation should be accompanied by a training that
includes a clear explanation of the need for the formalization, translating the roles
and responsibilities defined in the documentation to the civil servants, and
stressing the requirement for documenting each step in the process such that the
procurement objectives are met, in letter and spirit.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
123

7.6. Transparency and strategic communications
7.6.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading
123
practices
A robust transparency regime can help a government build and maintain trust with internal and external
constituents, be more responsive to citizen needs, and improve the quality of public service delivery.
Transparency ultimately promotes effectiveness and efficiency in public administration and raises the
credibility and reputation of a government among citizens, international organizations, and the private
sector. Among the key principles contained in leading transparency regimes are:
 Access to information: Publication and dissemination of government information--including budget
documentation--and mechanisms to enforce the public right to information (in line with domestic
laws).
 Facilitating citizen participation: Active engagement of citizens in providing input into the
development of government policies and programs, as well as feedback related to the
implementation of policies and programs.
 Promoting accountability: Rules, regulations, and procedures that require the disclosure of the
reasoning underlying administrative acts and justifications for decisions made by public officials in
their official capacity.
 Supporting technology: Government commitment to providing access to technology and improving
the capacity of citizens to use technology to obtain and understand information.
Specific measures found in leading transparency regimes include:
 Disclosure of organizational structure, points of contact, and decision-making processes of
government agencies and department.
 Income and asset declaration requirements for high-level public officials.
 Requirements that civil servants and elected public officials disclose conflicts of interests.
 Budget transparency mechanisms, including publication of all fiscal reports contributing to the
budget formulation process.
 Opportunities for citizens to provide input as part of public rule-making processes (e.g. notice and
comment procedures).
 Regular publication of reports by government agencies and departments detailing objectives as well
as progress made towards achieving these objectives.
 Access to government data through frequently updated websites, as well as mechanisms to provide
alternate methods of accessing information where use of the internet is not possible or not practical.
Strategic communications and outreach across internal and external audiences increases transparency
through awareness of the government’s overall goals and progress and allows for the engagement of
internal and external constituents in helping achieve the government’s strategic vision. Communications
should be disseminated through all available forms including:
 Website
 TV/Advertisements
123
The key features related to Transparency and strategic communications that are highlighted in this section represent an
aggregation of relevant guidance contained in the leading global standards and practices referenced in Appendix B.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
125

 Limited involvement with private sector: The private sector is not an active partner in the
GoSM’s anti-corruption and compliance efforts.
 Insufficient transparency due to language barriers: Most of Sint Maarten’s population is
fluent in English, and many residents are not fluent in Dutch. However, many of the official
documents and policies are published in Dutch which limits the ability of the public to process
information that is available.
 Limited insight into inspections/controls criteria: Inspections/controls do not always appear
to occur in an even-handed, objective manner, and inspections/controls criteria are not publicly
available.
Transparency and strategic communications
Limited public access to information
Observations Based on statements from interviewees and open source research, the Inquiry
team observes limited transparency within the Government. Many interviewees
believe that the public does not have insight into Government decision-making or
Government transactions. The National Ordinance Open Government does
permits citizens to request information regarding administrative matters, which is
defined as “a matter related to policy of an administrative body, including its
124
preparation and implementation.” The administrative body is given a maximum
of three weeks to “take a decision of the request.” The Ordinance also requires that
administrative bodies “shall regularly provide information on its own initiative on
the policy regarding administrative matters that concern it.” However, the
Ordinance does contain specifics about which information should be made public.
Based upon interviews across Ministries and open source research, the following
information is not published by the GoSM or easily accessible to the public:
 Procurement/bid/contract documentation for goods and services including
large infrastructural works
 Third-party contracts
 Public expenditures
 Documentation around Government-owned buildings or rented buildings
 Asset declarations of Ministers (and other high level officials)
 Online open records (such as public transportation license holders, business
license holders, etc.)
 Campaign contributions
 Financial statements and board information of SoCs
According to senior VSA officials, the Ministry of VSA has plans to publish all
third-party contracts online; however, as of July 28, 2014, the third-party
contracts did not appear to be accessible online.
Many interviewees from Government, civil society, and private sector cited
transparency as the main problem with the Government. Many stated to the
124
Landsverordening openbaarheid van Bestuur
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
127

many of which are listed above, and periodically monitor and report on progress in
125
completing its action plan. While it is likely that the GoSM will need to improve
certain aspects of its transparency regime before it will be eligible to participate in
the OGP, the Inquiry team recommends using the OGP as a framework for reform.
With only two countries in the Caribbean currently participating in the OGP, the
GoSM could take a highly visible step towards being a regional leader in
government transparency by declaring its intention to satisfy the eligibility
requirements of the Partnership and beginning to work towards full participation.
Progress towards this objective could be detailed on the Fight Against Corruption
website to clearly demonstrate the Government’s commitment to transparency.
Require the disclosure of all political donations above ANG 5,000: The
GoSM should require the disclosure of campaign contributions over ANG 5,000,
regardless of whether the donation is made by an individual or an entity. The
general public should have access to this data online and should not have to make
a formal request at the office of the Electoral Council. Further, the National
Ordinance Registration and Finances of Political Parties should be amended to
remove the option for entities to prevent the reporting of their company names,
and instead should require the disclosure of the names of all entities and
individuals to the general public.
Transparency and strategic communications
Limited enforcement data collection and publication
Observations Enforcement statistics for public corruption cases are not effectively maintained
and published by the GoSM. A Ministry of Justice official stated that statistics on
corruption cases are not published but such publication could be “a possibility” in
the future. With regards to disseminating information within a Ministry on
disciplinary action taken, a Minister stated that cases are “handled internally. It’s a
small island and community - we try not to embarrass people any more than they
already are. People just know about the issues.”
Recommendations Document and track enforcement statistics as a performance measure,
and publish these statistics: Enforcement statistics on integrity breach cases
should be published quarterly on the Fight Against Corruption website as a way to
measure progress on enforcement and to serve as a deterrent. Data should also be
tracked and published on identified integrity breaches as well as the type of
disciplinary action taken to resolve the issue across the Government. Data across
departments and Ministries should be centralized, transparent, stored
electronically, easily accessible, and widely communicated throughout the
Government to promote consistent messaging and to avoid discrepancies. It is
essential for data to be accurate and consistent before it is widely communicated.
Transparency and strategic communications
Perceived lack of commitment to fighting corruption
Observations Interviewees stated to the Inquiry team that they were frustrated by the amount of
integrity assessments and integrity campaigns launched targeting low- and
125
“How it Works: Requirements,” Open Government Partnership; http://www.opengovpartnership.org/how-it-works/requirements
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
129

o The Government’s plan to fight corruption and increase enforcement
and information on bodies within the Government charged with
fighting corruption (National Detectives, Prosecutor’s Office, Integrity
Bureau)
o The Government’s short- and long-term goals
o Reporting mechanisms within the Government including when/how
to utilize them and how complaints are handled; specific information
about the anonymous whistleblower hotline that is administered by a
third party and description of how complaints are handled once
reported on the hotline
o Progress updates including updated information/statistics
o Customer rights and responsibilities to aid in the initiative
o Recent case examples and actions taken
o Progress on automation
o Information and data related to vulnerable areas of corruption within
the Government
o Risk analysis methodology and planning criteria for
inspections/controls
o The website should be continuously updated and monitored
 Partner with civil society to launch a social media campaign with the slogan
“#SXMLet’s Enforce!.” Provide information on Facebook and Twitter on the
Government’s anti-corruption initiatives and continuously update these with
new data and information including statistics/metrics on action taken against
corrupt leadership and employees. Allow for anonymous posts and encourage
the public to write comments and start a dialogue on their perspective on the
core reasons for corruption within the Government and ways to combat the
corruption. Monitor comments from the public and take measures to address
issues raised in order to increase positive public perception of the
Government.
Transparency and strategic communications
Limited involvement with private sector
Observations Through interviews conducted, the Inquiry team observed that the private sector
does not appear to be an active partner in the Government’s integrity initiatives.
Some business and trade associations exist, but the Inquiry team did not identify a
Government sponsored forum for the private sector to work with the Government
to promote integrity.
Recommendations Leverage the private sector in the Fight Against Corruption: Create an
Investment Council of local and foreign businesses to gain private sector
perspective and support for the Fight Against Corruption. The Investment Council
should serve as a strong ally to the Government in deterring corruption on the
“supply” side and convene meetings on a regular basis. The GoSM should work
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
131

vulnerable to violations that form the basis for a “year plan” (i.e. an annual
strategic plan). Businesses to be inspected daily are chosen based on complaints
filed or are determined based on the team’s discretion as long as the business falls
within one of the themes of the year plan. Themes include sectors such as
construction, service industry, adult entertainment, and car rentals that are
vulnerable to illegal workers, safety violations, service-related violations, and other
license/permit violations.
However, the year plan for inspections is not always followed. A business owner
stated, “[inspectors] check [my business] five times in five years and the [the one
next door] has not been checked once. They know we will comply with the
inspection so they keep coming back.” A Ministry of Justice official stated that
there are certain businesses that should be avoided that are tied to politicians
because if those are inspected, the official “will certainly get a call. We don’t have
the full control to decide exactly where to control.”
A Ministry of Justice official stated to the Inquiry team that the
inspections/controls teams need to publicize their criteria and determine their
inspections using a risk analysis based approach by stating,
“what are the reasons for their inspections? They need to have
more procedures to make their organization more professional.
Their inspections policy and criteria need to be public so
everyone will know why one company is inspected and not
another – otherwise, it won’t hold up in court because people
say it was selectiveness.”
Recommendations Develop a formalized, objective, and strong risk-based criteria on how
to select businesses for inspections and make the criteria more
transparent: Along with the selection criteria, publish statistics around the
number of inspections/controls conducted (across all departments), number of
violations identified, and number/type of sanctions levied. This information will
help serve as a deterrent to businesses or individuals and will encourage
compliance with policies and procedures.
7.7. Personnel management
7.7.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading
126
practices
Personnel management incorporates all elements of a government’s human resources management
structure, including: recruitment; hiring/staff placement; disciplinary action; terminations;
payroll/bonuses; promotion; and training. Governments should adopt human resource policies and
procedures aligned to international leading practices, which include:
 Transparent hiring and performance review criteria and overall consistent human resources
management policies and procedures.
126
The key features related to Personnel management that are highlighted in this section represent an aggregation of relevant
guidance contained in the leading global standards and practices referenced in Appendix B.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
133

 Insufficient capacity in some departments: Many areas of the GoSM claim to lack resources
and equipment to effectively carry out their functions. Some of these areas are in key sections of the
Government that promote good governance.
 Opportunities for improved career development and coaching: According to interviews
with civil servants, there is little meaningful career development and coaching for career civil
servants which could result in low levels of motivation to continue to excel within the Government.
Department heads also noted a perceived lack of support from the Government to effectively manage
their teams, specifically in relation to the Performance Management policy.
Personnel management
Opportunities to enhance integrity training
Observations Opportunities exist to make integrity trainings more effective and impactful across
the Government. According to a Ministry of General Affairs official, the
Government has held four integrity trainings since 10/10/10 including two for the
entire civil service (one in 2012 and one in 2013) focused on dilemma training.
Another training was held specifically for managers, and one was held for
Ministers. According to a Ministry of General Affairs official, 60-75% of
department heads attended the first integrity training on dilemmas and 40-50%
attended the second training. Five Ministers attended each of the larger civil
service trainings and two parliament staff attended both of these same trainings.
The training that specifically catered to managers was attended by 40% of
managers. The number of Ministers who attended the training for Ministers was
not provided by the Ministry of General Affairs. None of the trainings are
administered on a specific cadence, according to the official.
A department head and a Ministry of Justice official separately categorized the
completed integrity trainings as a “waste of time” and a former Lieutenant
Governor stated that no training is done “on what the law requirements are.” A
Ministry of Justice department head stated, “many of the heads of departments
don’t show up…most civil servants – they want to do the right thing, but the
department heads don’t come.” A Minister stated, “training courses have made an
impact. What I have heard and noticed is that civil servants say ‘are Ministers
getting it? Are parliamentarians getting it?’”
When asked if action was taken against employees who did not attend, the
Ministry of General Affairs official stated, “it was a mandatory training and the
invite was sent via the Minister. So it was up to the Minister on what to do with
people who didn’t come.” According to the official, the Minister of Justice
requested the registration list but did not communicate any action to be taken
against employees who did not attend the training. None of the other Ministers
requested registration information to determine who in their Ministry attended
the training, according to the official.
Recommendations Develop effective, interactive, and standardized anti-corruption
trainings across the Government and mandate managers and senior
leadership to attend all trainings: Trainings should be organized by the
Integrity Bureau – specifically the commissioner overseeing education, advice and
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
135

o The Government’s strategic vision and goals related to integrity.
o Details around case studies and action taken against employees, including
leadership, who engaged in corrupt activities.
o Information on new integrity initiatives.
o Any updates in laws or National or Ministry Decrees/policies and
procedures.
Personnel management
Inconsistent recruiting and appointment
Personnel are recruited and appointed in different ways across the Government,
Observations
and the intake policy does not appear to be consistently followed. The Employee
Handbook outlines the selection process for a new employee:
“The selection of the right candidate is done by a selection
committee. The intake policy stipulates who is part of the selection
committee for each type of position.
1. The first step in the selection process is the pre-selection of
the application letters.
2. After that the selected candidates have a job interview with
the committee.
3. Depending on the position, a skill test can be considered. For
instance, most candidates for management positions are
tested on several management skills.
4. For some positions a psychological test may be required.
5. A medical examination is required by law. However it is
usually done after approval for appointment. SZV does the
medical examination for Government.
After the committee has made its choice salary negotiations are
done by P&O. Most other benefits are regulated by law and are
non-negotiable. If an agreement is reached, an advice for
127
appointment is drafted for the Minister.”
According to many senior officials, the selection process is not always followed,
and the Minister frequently fills positions without the selection committee
conducting an evaluation of multiple applicants, as required in the intake policy. A
senior official stated that an individual is frequently placed into a position by a
Minister and the “recruitment process does not even occur. There is already a
decision that person X has been placed into a position.” Another senior official
stated to the Inquiry team,
“it’s not your country first, it’s my pocket first, or my relative, or
my party first, and then the country. This is the major issue,
127
Government of Sint Maarten Employee Handbook, Government of Sint Maarten;
http://pnobeleid.sharepoint.com/Documents/111124%20Employee%20Handbook%202011.pdf
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
137

 What criteria are used to determine if a negative Advice should be issued on
the hiring of an individual? What happens when a negative Advice is issued
around the hiring of an individual? Who makes the final decisions based on
hiring when negative screening results occur? Have there been cases where
negative screening results still led to the hiring of an individual in deviation
from National Decree AB 2012, no. 9?
 What happens when negative screening results are identified related to a
potential Minister, including the PM?
 Are screenings conducted on members of parliament?
 Is it mandated that screenings are completed prior to hiring? Are there
instances of individuals working before the completion of their screening?
 Are continuous screenings conducted to monitor changes over years of
employment? How often are employee screenings conducted?
 Are third parties that do business with the Government screened prior to the
finalization of contracts?
Passing of criminal checks should be a requirement prior to being hired by the
Government for all employees. It should be required that all necessary screenings
are complete before an employee may begin work. Criminal checks should be
conducted every two years on all officials, and comprehensive background checks
should be repeated every two to three years for high-risk positions.
The Government should conduct due diligence on all existing vendors to identify
potential integrity issues and based on the results, should consider termination of
contracts with high-risk vendors. Due diligence should be required prior to
entering into third-party contracts for new vendors and annual screenings should
be conducted on existing vendors. Information on screenings should be reviewed
and stored by the commissioner overseeing integrity pact and contractor
compliance.
Personnel management
Limited staff rotation
Observations Staff rotation is not a mandated policy in high risk functions, according to
department heads of those functions. Based on discussions in interviews, some
department heads do think staff rotation would be a good idea, and many stated to
the Inquiry team that staff rotation does informally occur within the Government,
but usually to transfer someone who has not performed well into another
department. A Ministry of Justice official stated, “If I had additional staff, I could
rotate people and that would be ideal. Sometimes we do it – but it is not a written
policy. It is more used as a punishment. We need to make the policy real.” A
VROMI official stated, “a job like this you have to rotate the person, you do not
leave a person in here too long - give them break. It is too easy to get corrupted.”
Recommendations Implement staff rotation in high-risk functions: Create and enforce a
policy around staff rotation especially around high-risk functions such as
license/permit processing and inspections/controls. Staff rotation can be a useful
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
139

approved, according to the department heads.
There is also inconsistency in compliance with the long term illness requirements
of the sick leave policy. A department head recounted to the Inquiry team an
example of an individual in their department who has been on sick leave since
2007 and has been receiving full pay since then. The employee handbook outlining
the Government’s sick leave policy states ,
“In case of long term illness, sick leave is granted by the SVB for
a maximum of 1 month. This period can be extended with
periods of maximum 1 month. During this illness one has to
remain under supervision of SZV and report back to SZV on the
dates indicated.
The total period of sick leave cannot exceed 4 years for civil
servants in permanent service, and 1 year for employees in
temporary service. During sick leave one is entitled to full pay
for the first 2 years, 90% during the third, and 80% during the
129
fourth year.”
An Advice for the employee’s dismissal from early May 2014 states the following,
 The employee has exceeded the maximum length of an exemption from
service due to sickness. During the past 6.5 years, they have retained their
full income.
 Both the physician at SZV and the APS Medical Advisory Committee have
investigated the health of the employee and found them to still be unable to
fulfill the requirements of their position.
 Through negligence of the organization, the employee’s income has not
decreased. Given that the employee will receive an immediate honorable
release from service, it is advised to not proceed with decreasing their
income.
 Given that the employee cannot resume their work responsibilities with the
Government of Sint Maarten, they will immediately receive an honorable
release from service. They are eligible for a disability pension from APS.
According to an official with direct knowledge of this case, the Advice was sent to
the Governor for sign off and the dismissal took effect on July 23, 2014, more than
seven years after beginning sick leave. According to a GoSM official, the employee
retained full salary during the seven years they were on sick leave, which did not
allow for a replacement to be hired, ultimately jeopardizing the efficiency and
effectiveness of their department.
Recommendations Enforce the Sick Leave Policy and consider dismissal of employees who
have not complied with the Sick Leave Policy and have been away from
their job for an extended period of time: All components of the sick leave
129
Government of Sint Maarten Employee Handbook, Government of Sint Maarten;
http://pnobeleid.sharepoint.com/Documents/111124%20Employee%20Handbook%202011.pdf
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
141

 Monitors compliance with the officially fixed hours for the
opening and closing times of the casino and makes violations
known to the head of the department head;
 Make a daily report and or identifies any irregularities to the
casino manager;
 Ensures strict adherence to the provisions of the casino’s, rules
and conditions;
 Provides information about the casino and its rules to casino
visitors and hear their complaints;
131
 Mediates between the visitor and the casino manager.”
Despite the job criteria outlined above, according to a TEZVT employee, casino
controllers have “no job criteria” or “day to day tasks,” and “there is nothing [for
them] to do.” The official stated that casino controllers had to “invent what to do”
each day, and some controllers were upset after the group was told performance
evaluations would take place even though there are no documented job tasks.
The Inquiry team was informed by various employees in different Ministries that
the primary responsibility of casino controllers is to monitor casino entrances and
ensure that local gamblers do not enter a gambling establishment more than three
times per month; however, high absenteeism and a lack of technological support
do not allow this task to be carried out effectively. A casino employee reported that
casinos are supposed to pay the Government ANG 7,500 per month for each
casino controller stationed at each entrance. The number of casino controllers
required for each casino varies depending on the hours of operation and number
of entrances of each casino since multiple controller shifts may be required.
Officials from the Ministry of TEZVT reported to the Inquiry team that no shared
system exists across casinos to track local individuals and how many times each is
entering a casino, which makes accomplishing the primary task of casino
controllers “near impossible.”
Casino employees and civil servants stated to the Inquiry team that they believed
casino controllers “rarely show up to work” – an impression that was confirmed
through interviews with Ministry of TEZVT officials who stated that there is a
substantial problem with absenteeism.
The Inquiry team interviewed employees of a casino and was able to review a
132
security log book documenting attendance of the casino’s controllers. Analysis of
the security log book covering 162 shifts in 81 days between February 13, 2014 and
May 4, 2014 showed that the controllers were absent for approximately 72% of
shifts during the recorded period. In addition, controllers reportedly arrived late to
131
Sint Maarten 2013 Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism Mutual Evaluation Report, Caribbean
Financial Action Task Force; https://www.cfatf-
gafic.org/index.php?option=com_docman&Itemid=414&task=doc_download&gid=894&lang=en
132
Excerpts of the Security Log Book and full data behind 81 days of analysis
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
143

immigrants who enter casinos and could work with the police to identify
“criminal” behavior.
Recommendations Remove or revise the casino controller function to add value to
regulating casinos: Based on interviews with individuals who work in casinos,
interviews with Government employees, and document analysis, it appears that
currently casino controllers provide little value to the casinos or to local gamblers.
The lack of information sharing means that even if a controller at one casino
limited a local to entering the casino only three times, the local individual could go
to another casino the next day, and the controllers and the Government would not
be aware. If the GoSM decides to keep the casino controller function it should
provide controllers with an electronic database to record and maintain attendance
records so controllers are able to see the actual number of times an individual has
entered a casino in a month’s time. The GoSM could also eliminate this function,
or train these individuals as part of the gaming oversight board so that the
Government has staff within the casino at all times to monitor illicit behavior.
Personnel management
Insufficient capacity in some departments
Observations In some departments, especially in enforcement and inspections/controls related
departments, there appears to be a lack of capacity. Many department heads
reported to the Inquiry team that they do not have enough staff to effectively carry
out their function.
A VSA official stated to the Inquiry team that there are four inspectors within the
Labor Inspectorate. One of these inspectors is reportedly on chronic sick leave, one
is periodically ill, and one is involved in a disciplinary action case due to
allegations of owning their own business to facilitate work permits (see
Investigations and enforcement for more information on this case.) It
appears that the Labor Inspectorate would not be able to function effectively under
the circumstances reported to the Inquiry team. A VSA official also stated that
food/safety inspectors did not have the capacity to comprehensively conduct
inspections. The official stated, “there are around 3,500 restaurants in the
database which have to be controlled with five people.” A Ministry of Justice
official stated about immigration controls, “one of the biggest problems is there are
not enough people to do the job – there are seven [mobile control officers] – you
can’t run Sint Maarten with seven people – no way, no how.” A TEZVT official
commented about civil aviation inspections, “there are four inspectors but [the
department] needs more people. It is at bare minimum right now.”
There is a perception amongst some interviewees that enforcement staff is
purposely limited by senior leadership in order to prevent the effective carrying
out of these functions. A Ministry of Justice official stated to the Inquiry team, “I
will never get more personnel because then I could do more damage.”
Critical vacancies exist within the Government, according to interviews with
Ministry of General Affairs officials. Some of these critical vacancies are filled by
existing employees that have to fulfill two jobs until someone is hired. For
example, the SG of VROMI is also the acting head of Domain Affairs, and a cabinet
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
145

133
annually, according to the performance management policy. A department head
stated, “feedback sessions are one-way, it is here is how you are telling me how I
am doing. This is really wrong. It should be a continuous process of constantly
providing feedback, mentoring and coaching.”
The performance management policy states that during their final assessment, an
individual could be rated poor performance, strong performance, or excellent
performance. For excellent performance the policy states,
“objectives were exceeded due to exceptional performance of the
employee. As an immediate result he will get an increment in
salary scale as of January and will also receive a bonus. The
bonus is an amount equal to 12 times the amount of his/her last
134
increment.”
A department head told the Inquiry team that they felt they were not given
adequate support to effectively manage their departments as a result of not being
able to award staff who received excellent performance ratings, despite the
provisions in the performance management policy. Some individuals who received
excellent performance ratings in some Ministries were awarded the increment in
salary scale, but the department head stated that their department had not
received the “incremental payments” as of June 2014, which was required by
policy to be paid in January. The department head stated to the Inquiry team that
they asked P&O and were told that the personnel advisor assigned to the Ministry
has been on long-term sick leave since April which is why the payments have not
been processed. The department head was also told that the Government does not
“have money to pay the increment.” The department head stated to the Inquiry
team, “The EP bonus is embedded in legislation and doesn’t have limitations in the
legislation for it to not be paid out.” The department head concluded by saying,
“HR management is a problem, and where that ties to integrity
is also significant, because if you have low employee morale,
and a civil servant population that feels they have been duped,
you have a gap for an integrity breach where an employee may
feel, ‘why can’t I take a payback for a license when I don’t get
my money anyway?’”
Another department head stated that they felt their staff is “demotivated” and that
“morale is low.” The department head stated that in order to address these issues,
coaching and leadership development training needs to be provided to section
heads and middle managers so that “they can demand more from their staff.” The
department head stated that “people skills, leadership training, conflict
management, and performance appraisals” are lacking and that the Government
should focus on “teaching people how to be a manager.” The department head also
stated,
133
Performance Management Policy, Government of Sint Maarten Employee Handbook, Government of Sint Maarten;
http://pnobeleid.sharepoint.com/Documents/111124%20Employee%20Handbook%202011.pdf
134
Id.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
147

transactions and functions as a powerful check on the abuse of public authority. Accurate data should be
kept by all agencies and departments within a government and should be shared with relevant counterparts
to aid in the joint detection of corruption and in measuring the effectiveness of integrity initiatives.
ICT systems should be capable of sharing data with relevant government stakeholders, including audit,
investigative, and prosecutorial functions, which will facilitate proper oversight by providing timely access
to data and assisting with identifying anomalous or potentially inappropriate activity. The use of
technological solutions to capture, store, and share data is the hallmark of a strong ICT platform and can
help government agencies and departments work together on shared goals and leverage complementary
capabilities.
7.8.2. Observations and recommendations
Poor information sharing as well as a lack of information automation between government functions
hinders a government’s ability to identify risks and prevent integrity breaches. ICT can not only streamline
data but also allows for audit trails and monitoring that can detect suspicious transactions. The GoSM has
limited document storage and retrieval capabilities, and the few processes that are able to be automated,
such as registering Advices, are not properly utilized for their intended purpose. In addition, the current
lack of automated systems leaves room for human manipulation of processes, for example, in the issuance
of licenses/permits. Insufficient documentary storage, poor information sharing among Ministries, and a
notable lack of automated information systems support a finding of low maturity as compared to global
standards.
The following were identified as key observations affecting systems and information sharing within the
GoSM, according to interviews conducted and documents analyzed by the Inquiry team:
 Limited document storage/retrieval capability: The GoSM has limited capacity to store and
retrieve documents. This lack of capacity impacts their ability to effectively avoid integrity breaches.
 Missed opportunities for automation in the Advice process: Advices are not registered in an
automated system, and therefore not always retrievable or completed in a timely manner. The
current system does not have an appropriate audit trail.
 Missed opportunities for information sharing due to a lack of official data sources: The
lack of unified and accepted official data sources leads to inconsistencies in data storage on tax
payers resulting in missed opportunities for information sharing throughout departments.
 Lack of information sharing for immigration control: Many Ministries and other functions
of Government do not effectively share information in order to jointly work to prevent integrity
breaches. Departments in VSA, Justice, and TEZVT do not effectively share information to jointly
tackle the high level of illegal immigrants in Sint Maarten resulting in vulnerabilities for abuse of the
system by undocumented immigrants.
 Integrity breach vulnerability in license/permit processing: License/permit processing
departments are one of the most prone to integrity breaches within the Government, and the lack of
automation within these departments makes the existing system more susceptible to integrity
breaches.
 Unclear indication of the impact of illegal immigration on social services: Illegal
immigration appears to have significant costs on the health care system and public education but the
level of impact is unknown. Resources devoted to social services do not currently account for the
impact of illegal immigration on those services.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
149

departments sent over documents in a timely manner; however, many
departments experienced difficulty in locating the information requested. DIV did
not appear to serve as an efficient tool for information retrieval for the purpose of
this Inquiry.
Negative impact on enforcement
The existing document storage system hinders enforcement as documents
required for investigations are not consistently accessible, according to a Ministry
of Justice official. An efficient and validated information storage facility is
extraordinarily important for the administration of the enforcement system.
Reliable business record retention systems with appropriate audit trails that
maintain chains of custody, authenticity and accuracy of documents is necessary
for civil and criminal enforcement proceedings – particularly so in cases of
investigations of corruption and integrity breaches where appropriately
authenticated documents serve as the foundation for successful enforcement
action. A Ministry of Justice official stated,
“the whole archive is not complete…many documents that you
need for investigation simply are not there. For example, in a
corruption investigation, we need to see a document where a
decision was taken. Sometimes you find it, sometimes you do
not find it. Most people remember what transpired then but
cannot find the document. DIV, the national archive is there, but
sometimes you don’t get all of the information.”
According to interviews, the procedure code allows for prosecutors to give written
authorization to departments across the Government to provide requested
information immediately. An official at the Ministry of Justice stated to the
Inquiry team that departments did not always promptly reply to requests for
documents. The official stated that it appeared that departments would “drag their
feet” in response to requests for information. A Justice official noted that verbal
authorization from leadership is also frequently given and the lack of substantive
written documentation housed in one system can make finding proof of
misconduct challenging.
Recommendations Conduct a comprehensive ICT systems assessment: A stocktaking exercise
should be undertaken to identify and assess the existing ICT systems in place
within the Government. Opportunities for linking ICT platforms or consolidating
platforms to facilitate information exchange between relevant agencies and
departments should be noted. This exercise should be performed by an
independent firm with experience conducting ICT systems audits and developing
recommendations for Government ICT solutions.
Establish automated archival procedures for consistent document
storage: All electronic documentation should be subject to automated archival
processes that are not dependent on approval or action by Government employees.
Archival processes should allow for the automatic classification of documents that
must be stored, as well as designation of the duration that such records should be
maintained. Archived documents should contain unique identification tags to
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
151

137
attached memo was not included. A department head recounted firsthand
accounts to the Inquiry team of cases of employee misconduct where Advices on
the removal of these employees remain on the Minister’s desk “for a long time” or
it “gets lost” in which case another Advice must be sent. A VROMI official stated
that integrity issues “start when [Advices] have to go through certain people and
then it doesn’t move…I am unsure if it is held up by department head, or SG or
Minister.”
Based on interviews and documents obtained by the Inquiry team, there does not
appear to be publicly available information on the protocol to issue Advices
including information on time limits to sign off on Advices. Many interviewees
stated to the Inquiry team that some Advices often stay on a Minister’s desk for as
long as they want, and there was no obligation for them to have to sign off within a
certain period of time. Interviewees from TEZVT and VROMI stated that they
believed Ministers sometimes did not sign off on Advices in a timely manner as a
way to exert influence over the requestor or as a stalling technique in order to
avoid signing off on more sensitive or controversial Advices. A civil servant stated
to the Inquiry team that 17 Advices have been sitting on a Minister’s desk that the
Minister “just doesn’t want to sign” because “most were negative Advices.” The
official stated that they suspect that the Minister will hold off on approving those
negative Advices until after elections. A VROMI official stated that after
inspections are conducted and warning letters issued, an Advice is made to exert
sanctioning power over the building in non-compliance. The official stated that
once the Advice is initiated, they are “unsure if it is held up by department head, or
SG, or Minister. Some of them are held up by department head or the Minister just
doesn’t sign it… [the Minister] is a politician and…does not want to alienate
[themselves] and lose votes.”
Recommendations Develop and enforce policies that require consistent usage of DECOS:
The policy should set strict timelines for signing off on different types of Advices
depending on workflow. The Minister should be given a mandated time to sign off
on an Advice that is reasonable within their workload. Departments, SGs, and
Ministers should be notified of the time restrictions for all of the different types of
Advices. Notifications should be sent to employees multiple times as the deadline
to sign approaches, and if the Advice is not signed by the particular department,
SG or Minister in the allotted time, the Advice should expire. The process to sign
off on an Advice should be completely automated and should not require any
manual intervention. No one should have the ability to edit the audit trail on an
Advice. Consider having the final Minister signature for some Advices signed
through electronic signature rather than hardcopy to further facilitate efficiency.
Systems and information sharing
Missed opportunities for information sharing due to a lack of official data sources
Observations Sharing information between different departments in the same Ministry or
between Ministries is challenging and information sharing is not leveraged to
jointly address integrity issues within the Government. Many interviewees cited
137
Advice related to a new appointment of a senior official (obtained from DIV and related Ministry).
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
153

VSA officials.
Lack of information sharing between Immigration teams and
Residency Permit Office
There appears to be a lack of information sharing between the Ministry of Justice’s
Immigration control teams and Residency Permit office. According to Ministry of
Justice officials, the Immigration control teams do not share or report data on
deportations with the Residency Office, and therefore its staff is not equipped to
identify immigrants who were previously deported. An Immigration official
reported to the Inquiry team that individuals who have been deported can gain
entry back into Sint Maarten and apply for residency without the Residency Office
having any knowledge of the deportation.
Lack of information sharing to prevent commercial sex workers from
violating six month work permit
There were many reported instances by the senior officials within the various
Ministries involved that sex workers overstay the six months permitted by their
work permit. Brothel owners are required to obtain temporary work permits from
the Ministry of VSA that permit commercial sex workers to stay in Sint Maarten
for six months. According to interviews with Ministry officials, commercial sex
workers are required to remain outside of Sint Maarten for one year prior to
138
applying for a new temporary work permit. According to officials involved in
Labor and Immigration, one way bypass the six month requirement is for
commercial sex workers to obtain a Director’s license from the Ministry of TEZVT,
which does not have shared information systems with Labor or Immigration.
Under Sint Maarten law, the granting of a Director license for a business allows the
person receiving the license to obtain residency from the Ministry of Justice.
According to Government officials in the several Ministries, there is an inability to
detect this as there is no automated system in place that allows the various
Ministries involved in the work/residency permit process to share information.
Recommendations Create a centralized immigration database: The GoSM should create a
database shared by the Ministry of VSA, the Ministry of TEZVT, and the Ministry
of Justice to facilitate oversight of the labor, director and residency permit
processes. This database should be a central repository for all foreign nationals
entering the country legally or identified illegally residing on the island. Sharing
this data will allow each Ministry to have essential information regarding all
foreign nationals, including date of birth, passport number, nationality,
occupation, valid permit dates, and prior immigration transgressions. Real-time
information sharing using a common IT platform will facilitate stronger oversight
and allow for proactive integrity risk management (e.g. inspectors will know when
licenses/permits are scheduled to expire and can allocate resources accordingly).
138
“Notitie m.b.t. toepassing nieuwe beleidsregels bij de behandeling van aanvragen voor tewerkstellingsvergunningen voor
‘commerciële seks werkers’,” National Gazette July 11, 2014;
http://www.sintmaartengov.org/government/AZ/laws/National%20Gazettes/Landscourant%2011%20juli%202014.pdf
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
155

can begin processing the permit.” Economic licenses also all have to be signed off
by the Minister which “adds to the length of time”, according to a TEZVT official.
TEZVT officials stated to the Inquiry team that controls are often conducted and
through the control it is often identified that businesses do not have active
business licenses but have submitted a request for one and completed payment of
the application fee. In these instances, TEZVT officials stated that the lack of a
valid license for an active business is overlooked as the processing period is known
to be “very long.” Similarly, if an individual requests an application for any type of
residency, they cannot be deported even though the law states that they should not
be on the island during that time, according to a Ministry of Justice official. A
department head stated, “the lack of automation also allows processors to
manipulate the system and stall processing until a payment is made.”
Inefficiencies for the license/permit requestor and impact on the
Government
Impact on investment
Automated systems linking the Residency Permit Office and the Labor department
do not exist, according to Ministry of Justice and Ministry of VSA employees. In
order to become a legal resident, the requestor must first obtain a work permit and
then request a residence permit. A Minister stated that creating a “one stop shop”
for documents to be submitted “has not worked for whatever reason” and previous
attempts have been “put on the back burner.” The current process for handling
residency and work permits appears inefficient and does not leverage information
sharing tools and automated systems that could speed up the process.
According to a business owner interviewed by the Inquiry team, having to go to
two departments and make two separate requests creates a burden for the
requestor and adds to the time that it takes to process a permit. The business
owner stated that foreign investment in Sint Maarten is not what it used to be and
obtaining work permits and bringing in foreign workers has become far more
difficult than neighboring countries. Prior to 10/10/10 the business owner stated
that obtaining work permits for foreign employees required two layers because a
portion was reportedly located in Curacao. Now, the process still requires two
layers (residency permit and work permit) despite both Ministries being in Sint
Maarten. The business owner said,
“you have to go to two different buildings, two different
lines…and we have told them many times, why are you making
it more difficult for us? Why should we have to go to two
departments? They need to create a one stop shop. It’s a cost to
the Government and time factor is there, and there is red tape in
both departments. Now they charge a separate fee to process
work permit and residence permit – but it should be one fee.”
Multiple business owners stated to the Inquiry team that investment would be
more fruitful in neighboring islands due to what they believed to be more
efficiencies and less bureaucracy. A business owner remarked,
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
157

an inspector/controller identifying the lack of a valid license, according to another
TEZVT official. Members of the Economic Licenses department stated that they
are currently “very busy” following up on all licenses that have not been picked up.
Recommendations Increase discipline of permit and license processing through
automated application management system: A key vulnerability in permit
and license processing is the lack of a clear timeline for issuing or rejecting
applications. This introduces the opportunity for public officials to solicit, or
applicants to offer, facilitation payments to expedite processing. In order to
address this vulnerability, the permitting and licensing process should be governed
by an automated application management system that requires Government
employees to issue or reject a permit within a specified number of days from
receipt of an application. This timeline should be well-publicized so that applicants
are aware of when they should expect a determination, and applicants should be
able to verify the status of their application through an external website. Relevant
Government employees should be subject to disciplinary action or adverse
performance reviews for failing to comply with the application management
system. In addition to reducing the opportunity for integrity breaches, an
automated process that imposes a strict timeline for issuing or rejecting permit
and license applications will help the Government to start collecting associated
fees in a timely manner and will reduce the number of unlicensed and unpermitted
activities.
Automatic notification of approved business licenses: The current
practice of requiring business owners to collect their license before being held
liable for fee payments creates an incentive for business owners to delay collecting
their license. To eliminate this adverse incentive, business owners should be
automatically notified when their license is approved and be held liable for
associated fees upon notification. This notification system should be integrated
with the automated process for reviewing permit and license applications
discussed above.
Systems and information sharing
Unclear indication of the impact of illegal immigration on social services
Observations Illegal immigrants who gain entry into Sint Maarten are provided public education
and free medical services if they have a medical emergency from the GoSM,
according to interviews with employees at the Ministry of VSA and OCJS. Officials
stated that because of this, increased patients and students likely place a burden
on Sint Maarten’s public health and education systems, and the GoSM appears to
be unaware of the added costs required to support these programs. Currently, the
Ministry of OCJS is only aware of the costs to educate registered children,
according to a senior OCJS official.
Immigrants who come to Sint Maarten legally by obtaining work permits are also
entitled to healthcare with premiums paid for by the employer, according to a
senior VSA official. The official noted that individuals may obtain work permits in
order to obtain health coverage and then leave their job shortly after beginning
employment. Currently it does not appear that there is a mechanism to determine
whether an individual remains employed at their job unless the employer submits
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
159

8. Assessment of the integrity
architecture of state-owned
companies
The GoSM is the sole shareholder of several N.V.s and foundations that are key contributors to Sint
141
Maarten’s economy and public infrastructure. SoCs require enhanced controls to combat market
distortion and misuse of public funds and the GoSM should require SoC disclosure of governance and
142
ownership structures to all stakeholders. SoC transparency supports a public perception of integrity and
increases accountability to internal and external stakeholders, including the GoSM and the general
143
public.
It should be noted that this Inquiry did not include an analysis of the quality of the external audits or
procedures related to those audits. Rather this Inquiry focused on the overall state of governance and
integrity practices related to the SoCs when compared to global standards and leading practices.
8.1. Governance and corporate structure
8.1.1. Princess Juliana International Airport Operating
Company N.V.
The Princess Juliana International Airport Operating Company (“PJIAE”) is the operating company of Sint
Maarten’s international Airport. The organization is managed by a Managing Board of Directors which is
supervised by a Supervisory Board of seven Directors, as stated within the company’s articles of
incorporation. The Managing Director (“MD”) is the only managing board member and appears to have
sole authority for PJIAE’s commitment and devotion of resources to integrity and anti-corruption,
according to interviews with Airport officials. The Managing Board and Supervisory Directors of PJIAE are
appointed by the Princess Juliana International Airport Holding Company (“PJIAH”) which is PJIAE’s sole
144
shareholder.
It is noted that the business operations of the airport take place in PJIAE. As a result the Inquiry regarding
the airport primarily covered PJIAE; certain aspects of the holding company in relation to governance are
discussed below.
8.1.2. N.V. Gemeenschappelijk Electriciteitsbedrijf Bovenwindse
Eilanden
N.V. Gemeenschappelijk Electriciteitsbedrijf Bovenwindse Eilanden (“GEBE”) is Sint Maarten’s main
electricity producer and water distributor. The organization is managed by a Managing Board of Directors
141
According to the Contract Documents, state owned companies are defined as “legal entities incorporated by or on behalf of the
government via private or public law as well as subsidiaries thereof.”
142
Transparency of State-owned Enterprises, Transparency International,
http://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/answer/transparency_of_state_owned_enterprises
143
Id.
144
2013 PJIAE Annual Report
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
161

Special Note: It is noted that the SMHHC did not provide the Inquiry team with any documentation
which was requested from the company, and therefore the Inquiry of this entity was limited to information
obtained through interviews and documents provided by third parties.
8.3. Commitment and devotion of resources
8.3.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading
147
practices
Preventing integrity breaches in SoCs requires a strong commitment from leadership to establish the
148
appropriate “tone at the top” that the company will not tolerate corrupt behavior. Senior executives
must communicate clear expectations, both orally and in writing, that all employees adhere to the highest
standards of ethical behavior and that misconduct will result in disciplinary action. Leadership is also
responsible for allocating sufficient resources to promote compliance and effective oversight, and for
ensuring that instances of misconduct are addressed promptly, investigated, and where appropriate,
disciplined in a manner proportionate to the level of misconduct, up to and including termination. Leading
global standards, such as the World Economic Forum’s Partnering Against Corruption Initiative’s
Principles for Countering Bribery, describe characteristics that SoC leadership should demonstrate in order
to prevent integrity breaches, including the following:
 Frequent communications, both orally and in writing, regarding the organization’s unequivocal
stance against corruption, as well as emphasis on the importance of employees understanding their
obligations under relevant anti-corruption policies.
 Allocation of sufficient resources to conduct periodic employee trainings, risk-based due diligence,
internal investigations, and internal audits of compliance with relevant anti-corruption policies.
Leading practices recommend allocation of resources for training board members on topics such as
accounting standards, tax legislation, and other relevant regulations.
 Consistent and visible support, from leadership for ethics and compliance programs.
 Leadership commitment to transparent disciplinary actions in response to misconduct.
 Ethics and compliance metrics incorporated into employee evaluation processes and linked to
promotions.
147
The key features related to Commitment and devotion to resources that are highlighted in this section represent an
aggregation of relevant guidance contained in the leading global standards and practices referenced in Appendix B.
148
Combating Extortion and Bribery: ICC Rules of Conduct and Recommendations, International Chamber of Commerce;
http://www.iccwbo.org/Advocacy-Codes-and-Rules/Document-centre/2004/ICC-Rules-of-Conduct-and-Recommendations-to-
Combat-Extortion-and-Bribery-(2005-Edition)
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
163

each took a strong stance against corruption, visible support for or a commitment
to the establishment of a robust integrity compliance program was not identified.
The Inquiry team notes that one SoC appeared to have a whistleblower policy, and
another reportedly has plans to deliver integrity training to its staff. There appears
to be a lack of consistency and integrity messaging across the SoCs and in certain
instances it was noted that SoCs have not implemented many of the components of
an effective integrity compliance program such as a Code of Conduct for
employees, mechanism for communication of ethics and integrity or an
acknowledgment by the Supervisory Board or MD that integrity must be an
element of, and supported by, the management team.
Avoidance of turnover tax on fuel sales required for commercial
marinas
SMHHC competes with local companies in the fueling industry through its
subsidiary, Sint Maarten Harbour Fueling Company N.V. (“SMHFC”). SMHFC
does not pay the 5% turnover tax on fuel sales that commercial marinas are
required to pay, according to SoC senior officials interviewed by the Inquiry team,
possibly allowing SMHFC the option to offer lower fuel prices than local
competitors. It is noted that in 2012 the SMHFC sold “well over 5 million liters of
fuel” at a total value in excess of USD 5.5 million, saving the SMHFC
149
approximately USD 275,000 in taxes.
Further, a GoSM official noted in an email to the Inquiry team that the Ministry of
VROMI could not find a hindrance permit for fueling activities belonging to the
SMHHC dating back to 2000, and that it was the employee’s “assumption
therefore that one does not exist.”
Lack of dedicated resources
The Airport employs a Compliance Officer who supports the organization’s
compliance efforts, through audits and other means, to measure compliance with
internal policies and procedures as well as international laws and regulations;
implement and enforcement policies and procedures; and collaborate with the
Internal Auditor to investigate matters of potential fraud, according to the
150
Compliance Officer job description reviewed by the Inquiry team.
GEBE, SMHHC and Telem do not appear to have resources dedicated to ethics or
compliance, according to interviews with senior officials from each company. It is
noted that the Airport, GEBE and Telem do appear to have an internal audit
function which could serve as an independent body to evaluate and improve the
effectiveness of an integrity compliance program, should one be established.
Recommendations The GoSM should assert itself as sole shareholder and enforce SoC
compliance with laws governing private companies: It appeared during
the Inquiry that some SoCs operate with no accountability to their sole
shareholder, the GoSM. The GoSM should assert itself as the sole owner of the
149
SMHHC 2012 consolidated financial statements
150
PJIAE’s Compliance Manager Job Responsibilities
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
165

instance was noted whereby incomplete information was provided to the CGC
related to a candidate for a senior position at a SoC. As a result, proper due
diligence was apparently not performed on the respective candidate or the
candidate’s former role as a Ministry employee during which alleged connections
to improper conduct appear to not have been taken into consideration.
The CGC advised the GoSM to consider alternatives to the proposed appointment
of the SoC official due to the lack of information provided by the parties involved
and because a criminal investigation of the candidate was “highly likely”,
according to a letter from the CGC to the GoSM regarding the appointment, in
which the CGC also noted that an alternate candidate or the appointment of an
interim director should have been considered due to the importance of this SoC to
Sint Maarten’s economy.
The Inquiry team spoke with current and former Ministry employees who
completed an internal investigation regarding the alleged financial
mismanagement by this SoC official. While the Inquiry team did not conduct a
forensic investigation of the material, in the information recovered and analyzed,
including copies of emails and a summary report, Ministry employees concluded
that the official assisted in coordinating payments to vendors unrelated to the
official’s department and payments missing required approvals. It is noted that the
SoC which the official currently heads appears to have active contracts with several
of the vendors named in internal investigation documents that received alleged
153
illicit payments.
Potential conflicts of interest
The Inquiry team identified inconsistencies in the procurement bidding process by
one of the SoC’s in which bids appear to have been awarded to individuals with
close personal and/or professional relationships with SoC senior officials. It does
not appear that this SoC has appropriate due diligence procedures to help identify
and mitigate potential conflicts of interest.
Inconsistent tone at the top
In January 2014 a SoC official allegedly met with a potential concessionaire in the
United States to discuss a potential customer service concession at the SoC,
according to an interviewee who provided a firsthand account of the situation.
During the interview of the prospective deal the senior SoC official allegedly asked
the potential concessionaire, “what is in it for me?,” and indicated that they had
the ability to set up an offshore account at the request of the potential
concessionaire should they agree to terms for the deal. During a later meeting
between the potential concessionaire and the SoC’s official’s assistant, the
assistant reportedly notified the potential concessionaire that the SoC official
required “20% of the deal”, according to interviewees. The deal was reportedly
called off by the senior SoC official once they became aware of a relationship
between the potential concessionaire and another SoC official who would have to
approve the deal.
153
SoC contracts reviewed and emails from SoC employees
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
167

all disciplinary action and should formally have the power and discretion to
initiate investigations. The CCO officer should coordinate integrity and Code of
Conduct trainings for all employees at the SoCs, including senior management.
The CCO should be in charge of dissemination of internal and external messaging
and communications around the SoCs’ commitment to eliminate corruption.
Implement a third-party due diligence policy: Each SoC should implement
policies and procedures to perform properly documented, reasonable and
proportionate integrity due diligence on third parties prior to entering into
business relationships including mergers, acquisitions, investments, suppliers,
156
vendors and joint-ventures. Due diligence procedures should be performed in
order to mitigate risk to the company through the identification of reputational
issues and potential conflicts of interest which the SoC should avoid.
The SoC that has active contracts with the entities mentioned in the internal
investigation noted above should perform due diligence on these entities and a
review of services being provided to assess the integrity of the contracts, and
individuals representing the entities, as well as to identify potential conflicts of
interest.
8.4. Integrity compliance programs
8.4.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading
157
practices
The heightened corruption risk facing some SoCs underscores the need to implement a strong, enterprise-
wide integrity compliance program. Leading practices in the design and implementation of corporate ethics
and anti-corruption compliance programs for SoCs include:
 Internal policies that clearly prohibit misconduct (e.g. bribery and embezzlement) and provide
guidance on issues such as facilitation payments, gifts, and entertainment.
 Periodic, enterprise-wide risk assessments to identify potential vulnerabilities for corruption.
 Risk-based, tiered due diligence procedures to vet third-party business associates.
 Human resources procedures that address recruiting (e.g. background screening process), hiring
(e.g. policies around hiring current or former government officials), and transparent disciplinary
mechanism to investigate and where appropriate punish misconduct.
 Anti-corruption training that is tailored to the specific role and function of relevant staff.
 Maintenance of a secure hotline for employees and third parties to anonymously report suspected
misconduct, as well as clear procedures for handling and investigating complaints.
 Periodic internal audits of the organization’s compliance with anti-corruption policies and
procedures, and an iterative improvement process to address gaps.
156
Business Principles for Countering Bribery, Transparency International;
http://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/pub/business_principles_for_countering_bribery
157
The key features related to Integrity compliance program that are highlighted in this section represent an aggregation of
relevant guidance contained in the leading global standards and practices referenced in Appendix B.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
169

PJIAE in-progress compliance charter
PJIAE is currently working on a new, recently-approved compliance charter that
will include policies and procedures for board oversight; executive management
supervision; standards, policies, procedures and reporting mechanisms; and
158
compliance and ethics. A Code of Conduct for employees that will contain ethics,
policies, and procedures, as well as a Code of Ethics for the Supervisory Board of
Directors, are also in-progress, according to interviewees.
SMHHC
The Inquiry team did not observe an established integrity framework for SMHHC
through interviews.
GEBE
The Inquiry team did not observe an established integrity framework at GEBE.
Additionally, GEBE does not appear to currently have a Code of Conduct for
employees, or any other policy or procedure that explicitly prohibits bribery or
corruption. GEBE’s management indicated during a meeting with the Inquiry
team that the organization is in the process of approving a Code of Conduct.
Several documents requested from GEBE, including any anti-corruption or
procurement-related policies were not provided to the Inquiry team, and therefore
a complete analysis of GEBE’s integrity framework was not conducted. GEBE’s
management did indicate in interviews that the company does have a procurement
procedure that involves a bidding process for large contracts and employs the use
of an internal audit department to review bid submissions.
Telem
The Inquiry team did not observe an established integrity framework for Telem.
Telem does have a whistleblower policy which encourages employees to report
misconduct, states that it provides protection for anonymous reporting and
reprisal, and also includes procedures on how to initiate and complete and
investigation into reported allegations. Telem did not appear, however, to have
additional anti-corruption-related policies.
It is noted that although the whistleblower policy states that individuals who make
complaints can remain anonymous, the policy does not appear to have any sort of
mechanism to ensure this, such as a third-party hotline. The current policy
appears to require an individual to make a complaint in person, which can
compromise true anonymity.
Internal audit
As noted previously, Telem, PJIAE and GEBE appear to have an internal audit
function, and Telem’s internal audit department appeared to produce reports to
management on targeted programs and initiatives, according to documentation
analyzed by the Inquiry team. Interviewees indicated that GEBE has an internal
158
PJIAE’s Compliance Charter
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
171

Institute whistleblower policies and complaint mechanisms: SoCs
should institute policies and procedures for employees and third parties to make
complaints and promote the protection of whistleblowers. Each SoC should launch
an internal whistleblowing hotline administered by a third-party vendor. The
internal hotline should be focused on protecting the anonymity of whistleblowers,
which can be compromised by making complaints in-person. Each SoC should also
set up an Executive Committee to triage allegations. The Executive Committee
should utilize a strategic selection process to identify the merits of allegations to
focus on plausible claims.
A risk assessment should be conducted on those claims to determine the
parameters (e.g., timing, team composition, locations of relevant information, etc.)
of investigation. Investigative teams, based on parameters identified by the
Executive Committee, should prepare an investigative plan, consistent with
leading practices, and perform the investigation. Action taken against employees
as a result of the complaints filed should be publicized consistent with privacy laws
throughout the SoC to serve as a deterrent. All allegations should be tracked, and
periodic reporting of allegations and their disposition should be escalated to the
Supervisory Board of Directors.
Conduct checks for non-compliance through internal audit: SoC internal
audit functions should support management efforts to implement integrity
compliance programs to help ensure implementation is carried out consistently
and effectively. The support from internal auditors will also promote
management’s visible and active commitment to the implementation of each
program. Internal audits should include, but not be limited to, third-party
payments, expenditures made by SoC management, Supervisory Board members
and employees, and adherence to SoC policies and procedures to identify instances
of non-compliance by SoC staff. Internal auditors should report to senior
management and the Supervisory Board of Directors for follow-up, including
investigations and enforcement if necessary.
Assess compliance through periodic, independent external
assessments: Once integrity compliance programs are in place, the GoSM should
require each SoC to procure a periodic, independent external assessment of each
program to promote continuous improvement. A qualified third party should be
hired to assess the design and operation of each integrity compliance program,
including potential risks against leading integrity compliance frameworks (e.g., the
World Economic Forum’s Partnering Against Corruption Initiative Principles for
Countering Bribery). The assessment should provide observations around
compliance gaps and recommendations to remediate such gaps.
Integrity compliance program
Vulnerabilities in expense policies that create opportunity for “double dipping”
Observations The SoCs appear to have travel and expense policies which create opportunities for
abuse by staff. It appears that staff from a SoC received daily cash allowances for
meals prior to travel but purchased meals using corporate credit cards while on the
trip, according to documents analyzed by the Inquiry team. In 2014, the
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
173

 Establishing formal lines of communication to ensure fair disclosure of information such that all
potential bidders receive equivalent guidance and instructions.
 Promoting competition by requiring a minimum number of bidders for tenders commensurate with
the value of the contract to be awarded.
 Establishing clear guidelines governing the appropriate use of sole-source contracting that are
predicated on objective criteria such as a lack of technically qualified bidders and public
emergencies.
 Maintaining the confidentiality of information received from bidders during the tender process.
 Implementing policies to address potential conflicts of interest and bias in the bid evaluation
process. This may include requiring disclosure of private interests from SoC employees involved in
the bid evaluation and award process.
 When permissible, conducting post-award negotiations in an ethical manner in accordance with pre-
defined procedures (e.g. negotiations should be conducted within a specified time period).
 Offering to provide feedback to unsuccessful bidders with due regard to confidentiality
considerations.
8.5.2. Observations and recommendations
Although most of the SoCs had some procurement rules in place, many of the procedures had broad
exceptions and were often not followed as intended. Overall, the lack of procurement rules and policies and
the presence of broad exceptions that created gaps and vulnerabilities in the procurement process
supported a finding of low maturity for SoC procurement framework.
The following were identified as key observations affecting procurement within the SoCs, according to
interviews conducted and documents analyzed by the Inquiry team:
 Broad or unwritten procurement rules in place: The majority of the SoCs appear to have
procurement policies in place, however some procedures appear to be undocumented or have broad
requirements.
 Gaps in compliance with procurement exceptional circumstances: One SoC was identified
to have sole sourced a USD 2 million construction contract to a family member of one of the SoC’s
Supervisory Board of Directors.
Procurement
Broad or unwritten procurement rules in place
Observations PJIAE
The procurement of goods, works and services at PJIAE is governed by its
Procurement Management Policy and Procedures. the procurement function is
built upon the following five principles: cost effectiveness; open and fair
competition; conflicts of interest; centralized procurement; and supervisory board
161
of directors resolutions. The procurement policy also contains procedures to
obtain vendor quotes for awards over certain threshold amounts.
Although PJIAE has established rules for procurement in place, they were not
observed by the Inquiry team to be consistently adhered to. The guidelines within
161
PJIAE’s Procurement Management Policy and Procedures, December 1, 2013; Version 1.0
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
175

Require internal audit to review large procurements: An internal audit
team should review large procurements to determine whether procurement
policies and procedures were followed. A report should be made on deviations
from the process and provided to senior management and the Supervisory Board
of Directors. The SoCs should strive to abide by its procurement rules and justify
in writing any deviations from its policies. If integrity breaches are identified,
internal audit staff, in cooperation with the CCO, should make a report to the
relevant Minister shareholder representative. Disciplinary measures should be
taken against any employees, including senior leadership, identified to be involved
in integrity breaches.
Procurement
Gaps in compliance with procurement exceptional circumstances
Observations SoCs appear to use exceptions to procurement rules in order to bypass bidding
procedures and sole source contracts. In July 2013, a SoC announced a new
construction project adjacent to the organization’s property that would include
163
three sculptures made by a local company. The cost of the sculptures appears to
have been USD 254,000, which is above the threshold for sole source
procurement, according to the SoC’s procurement policy. A senior official
confirmed that a bidding process did not take place for the procurement of the art,
and appeared to justify the expense during an interview by stating, “one does not
initiate a bidding process for da Vinci.” A resolution signed by the SoC’s
Supervisory Board of Directors permitted management to proceed with the
procurement.
The SoC’s procurement policy does state that in “exceptional instances” sole source
providers can be exempted from the bidding process if one of the following
requirements is met:
 “Goods and/or services are compatible with current equipment,
infrastructure, or services;
 Service needs are mandated by the laws and regulations;
 An extraordinary urgency exists within 48 hours that may have an
unfavorable impact to daily operations or other business matter; or
 Vendor is the only business locally that provides the necessary goods and/or
services needed (e.g. only manufacturer or distributor).”
It does not appear that this procurement met any of the exceptions listed above as
it was a new construction project, services were not mandated by laws or
regulations, an extraordinary urgency did not exist, and the art appeared to have
been created in, and shipped from, Nigeria according to an export bill provided to
and analyzed by the Inquiry team. The Inquiry team also notes that the container,
which the SoC appeared to have paid for its shipping costs in full, contained two
additional works of art that appear to be unrelated to the original transaction.
163
Open source media reports
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
177

 Legal obligations requiring Board members to act in the best interest of the company and its
shareholders.
 Transparent nomination of Board members through a method that ensures sufficient independence
and objectivity to provide effective oversight and guidance. Appointments should be made at an
annual general shareholder meeting and incorporate input from non-government shareholders.
 Government representatives serving on the Board of a SoC should be subject to vetting process to
verify qualifications, and individuals with direct links to the executive branch of government should
not serve on the Board.
 Compensation of Board members should seek to advance the long-term interests of the SoC, be
aligned with market conditions, and endeavor to retain highly qualified candidates.
 Mechanisms to establish specialized Board committees to address specific issues, such as audit, risk,
and compensation, as necessary.
 Disclosure of relationships between SoC Board, management, and government officials.
8.6.2. Observations and recommendations
The GoSM currently has an adequate corporate governance framework in place consisting of regulations
and an oversight body; however, there appears to be limited compliance by the SoCs with the requirements
set forth within the framework. Overall, the GoSM does have a mechanism in place to provide governance
and oversight of the SoCs but it is not effectively utilized. Accordingly, a maturity finding of medium is
justified for governance and oversight as compared to global standards and leading practices.
The following were identified as key observations affecting governance and oversight within the SoCs,
according to interviews conducted and documents analyzed by the Inquiry team:
 Inconsistent compliance with corporate governance framework: The GoSM has an
established corporate governance framework consisting of the Island Ordinance Corporate
Governance, the Corporate Governance Code and the CGC. Compliance with Sint Maarten’s
corporate governance framework appeared to vary among the SoCs.
 Lack of independence of Supervisory Boards: SoC Supervisory Boards of Directors appear to
contain members of the Minister’s cabinet, possibly inhibiting those board members’ ability to make
decisions independently.
 Inconsistent payment of concession fees and dividends: Concession fees vary widely among
the SoCs; however it appears that the shareholder can request dividends from the organizations with
the approval of the Supervisory Board. One SoC appears not to have paid a concession fee since the
beginning of 2014.
 Unfair competition in maritime industry: A commercial maritime regulator appears to be a
wholly-owned subsidiary of a SoC that completes in the maritime industry, creating the potential for
an un-level playing field.
 Non-compliance with Corporate Governance Council: Historically, the CGC appears to have
been neglected by the GoSM and treated as a “necessary evil”, according to one its former members.
 Lack of supervisory board profiles: The Corporate Governance Code states that the GoSM’s
SoCs should have profiles for their Supervisory Board members. The SoCs do not appear to have
profiles, however, which may allow for the placement of unqualified personnel onto the boards.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
179

reporting on observance of the Corporate Governance Code. The dissolution of the
CGC in early 2014 was also noted as a substantial deviation from the framework
established by the Corporate Governance Code. The CGC has since been re-
established with the appointment of three new board members in May 2014.
The GoSM has created and implemented several measures to facilitate good
corporate governance of the country’s SoCs and foundations, including the
Ordinance Corporate Governance, the Corporate Governance Code, and until
recently, the CGC. Although these controls promote good corporate governance, it
appears that several of the SoCs do not adhere thoroughly to the guidelines set
forth within the GoSM’s corporate governance framework.
PJIAE
The articles of incorporation of PJIAE indicate that the company is “obliged to
comply” with the rules and regulations set forth within the Island Ordinance
167
Corporate Governance (A.B. 2009, no.10) and the Corporate Governance Code.
These statements are in compliance with the Corporate Governance Code which
states that SoCs should include in their articles of incorporation this obligation to
168
apply the provisions of the Code.
It is noted that the consolidated financial statements for PJIAH mention that the
company did not produce a report on compliance with the Corporate Governance
169
Code due to the “absence of significant operations at [the corporate level].”
It appears as though PJIAH’s management believes PJIAE it is not subjected to the
GoSM’s established corporate governance framework. Senior management of
PJIAH indicated that the holding company was the only company wholly owned by
the GoSM, and that because PJIAE was a subsidiary of PJIAH, PJIAE was not
required to abide by the GoSM’s corporate governance framework. The same
member of PJIAH’s management also indicated that Supervisory Board
appointments to PJIAE’s board do not require advice from the CGC.
SMHHC
A partial copy of the SMHHC’s articles of incorporation were provided to the
Inquiry team by a third party and contain provisions for the SMHHC to adhere to
170
the Corporate Governance Code. The articles of incorporation also state that the
organization’s Supervisory Board should have a minimum of five members
although there are currently only three. The SMHHC also reportedly performs an
annual a self-evaluation of compliance to the Corporate Governance Code and also
engages an external auditor to assess the organization’s compliance with the Code,
according to the SMHHC’s 2012 consolidated financial statements.
GEBE
GEBE’s management indicated that it began complying with the Corporate
167
PJIAH and PJIAE Articles of Incorporation
168
Corporate Governance Code
169
2012 PJIAH consolidated financial statements
170
Partial copy of SMHHC articles of incorporation
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
181

which contain measures, for example, on the minimum amount of Directors,
173
length of appointments, voting, and suspension and termination.
Governance and oversight
Inconsistent payment of concession fees and dividends
Observations PJIAE
PJIAE has a concession from the GoSM to operate the airport, however, it does not
appear that PJIAE or PJIAH pay a fee for the concession. PJIAE’s recent
refinancing agreements prohibit it from paying dividends to its shareholder,
according to several independent interviewees.
SMHHC
On July 18, 2007 the Harbour entered into a 30-year concession agreement with
the GoSM in which the Harbour agreed to pay the GoSM an annual fee of ANG 5.2
174
million for the first 10 years. Records retrieved from the Receiver’s Office
indicate that the Harbour did not pay its concession fee from January 2014 to May
2014 totaling an outstanding payment of about ANG 2.17 million. Harbour officials
indicated that it decided not to pay the concession fee to the GoSM to account for
funding that was reportedly promised from the Ministry of TEZVT to the SMHHC
for the upcoming Florida-Caribbean Cruise Association conference the Harbour is
hosting in October 2014.
GEBE
On August 2, 2010 GEBE singed a new concession agreement which requires the
175
organization to make annual payments to the GoSM of ANG 5 million. GEBE
officials indicated that the company has made advance concession fee payments to
the GoSM for 2014, 2015 and 2016. GEBE has not paid any dividends to its
shareholder(s) since 10/10/10, however the General Shareholders’ Meeting can
decide to distribute profits with the approval of the Managing Board and the
176
Supervisory Board of Directors.
Telem
Telem pays an annual concession fee of USD 4 million to the GoSM’s telecom
regulator, BTP, according to senior Telem officials. Similar to the other SoCs,
Telem’s shareholder can declare dividends through the approval of the General
Shareholders’ Meeting with consultation with the Supervisory Board of
177
Directors.
Recommendations Conduct financial analysis and determine whether to declare
dividends: The GoSM, as the SoC’s sole shareholder, should conduct a review of
the financial positions of each SoC and determine whether to declare dividends. It
is noted that at least one SoC was identified to be restricted from paying dividends
173
Burgerlijk Wetboek
174
2012 SMHHC Consolidated Financial Statements
175
GEBE’s 2012 Annual Financial Report
176
GEBE Articles of Incorporation dated May 12, 2012
177
Sint Maarten Telecommunication Company’s Articles of Association
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
183

violation of Sint Maarten’s Corporate Governance laws and regulations.
Recommendations Enforce corporate governance laws and regulations: The GoSM should
require SoCs to abide by the rules and regulations set forth within Sint Maarten’s
corporate governance framework. Additionally, the GoSM should enforce
disciplinary measures for non-compliance, as it appears there are currently no
repercussions for deviations from the established framework.
Governance and oversight
Lack of Supervisory Board profiles
Observations The four SoCs reviewed do not appear to have profiles established for Supervisory
Board members. One of the SoCs was identified to have previously procured
profiles from a consultant, but the Board never approved them, according to
information provided by the SoC’s management. This is mandated by the
Corporate Governance Code and SoC-wide non-compliance was identified.
Recommendations Mandate SoCs to formulate profiles for Supervisory Boards of
Directors: SoCs should formulate, review and approve profiles for the positions
on their Supervisory Boards of Directors through a systematic evaluation process
183
to enhance SoC board professionalism. The profiles will allow for a wide range of
necessary competencies amongst Board members. Additionally, a lack of profiles
can create vulnerabilities for the appointment of underqualified personnel and
nepotism.
8.7. Transparency
8.7.1. Description aligned to global standards and leading
184
practices
Increasing transparency in SoCs is particularly important given the unique position of these companies vis-
à-vis the government and the public. SoCs are often involved in highly lucrative industries that provide
essential public services such as energy, transportation, and communications. The privileged position of
SoCs often provides them with superior market access and substantial revenues, which ideally should be
reinvested for the benefit of the public. In reality, however, the lack of transparency in some SoCs facilitates
illicit financial transfers that divert public funds to private interests or for activities which do not optimize
public benefit given the nature of the mandate of the company. Global standards for promoting
transparency in SoCs specify that:
 The role of the government as an owner should be clearly communicated to the public, and an
ownership entity should be created and held accountable to a representative body (e.g. parliament).
 SoCs should be held to the same high accounting and auditing standards as listed companies,
including annual independent external audits in line with international auditing standards.
Purportedly equivalent government controls, such as monitoring activities by Supreme Auditing
Agencies, should not be considered a substitute for external audits.
183
OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance of State-owned Enterprises; Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development; http://www.oecd.org/corporate/ca/corporategovernanceofstate-ownedenterprises/34803211.pdf
184
The key features related to Transparency that are highlighted in this section represent an aggregation of relevant guidance
contained in the leading global standards and practices referenced in Appendix B.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
185

SMHHC
The SMHHC appears to be non-transparent with its business activities and
financial results. Several individuals who were interviewed mentioned repeated
attempts to obtain the SMHHC’s financial statements have been unsuccessful, but
that the general public should be able to obtain this information from the company
by law. The SMHHC discloses very little information in general about the 13
companies that form the group through its website or any other means.
GEBE
GEBE, in general, does not appear to be transparent with its business activities
186
and financial health, as recommended by leading practices. GEBE does not
appear to disclose financial and operating results; company objectives;
remuneration policies for executive management and the board; information
about the selection, qualification and independence of board members; related
party transactions involving its shareholder (and their close relations); foreseeable
187
risk factors or the company’s governance structure and policies.
Instituting disclosure and reporting mechanisms will increase GEBE’s
accountability to its stakeholders.
It is noted that the GEBE website was not accessible on several attempts the
Inquiry team made to access it, and therefore a full review of publicly available
information was not completed.
Telem
Telem, in general, does not appear to be transparent with its business activities
188
and financial results, as recommended by leading practices. Telem does not
appear to disclose financial and operating results; company objectives;
remuneration policies for executive management and the board; information
about the selection, qualification and independence of board members; related
party transactions involving its shareholder (and their close relations); foreseeable
189
risk factors or the company’s governance structure and policies.
Instituting disclosure and reporting mechanisms will increase Telem’s
accountability to its stakeholders.
It is noted that Telem appears to be one of few SoCs that operates in a competitive
environment in Sint Maarten, and therefore it may choose not to disclose certain
information to retain its competitive edge.
186
Transparency of State-owned Enterprises, Transparency International,
http://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/answer/transparency_of_state_owned_enterprises
187
Id.
188
OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance of State-owned Enterprises; Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development; http://www.oecd.org/corporate/ca/corporategovernanceofstate-ownedenterprises/34803211.pdf
189
Transparency of State-owned Enterprises, Transparency International,
http://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/answer/transparency_of_state_owned_enterprises
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
187

Recommendations Disclose third-party relationships with employees: Due to the size of the
country and quality of resources, it may be difficult to avoid conflicts of interest
relating to agreements of nominal value. SoCs should be transparent and disclose
these types of relationships to increase accountability and limit any perception of
conflicts of interest. SoCs should work to avoid conflicts of interest for larger
procurements and agreements.
8.8. Integrity
8.8.1. Description
During the course of the Inquiry, information was obtained related to potential integrity breaches by SoC
officials, Supervisory Board members and Minister Shareholder Representatives. The following is a
summary of the issues which the Inquiry team encountered.
8.8.2. Observations and recommendations
The following were identified as key observations affecting integrity within the SoCs, according to
interviews conducted and documents analyzed by the Inquiry team:
 Potential integrity breaches: Many interviewees reported to the Inquiry team potential integrity
breaches involving SoC personnel and Minister Shareholder Representatives. Examples of potential
breaches include nepotism when awarding contacts, using official positions for undue influence and
conflicts of interest. Below is a summary of these potential breaches.
Integrity
Potential integrity breaches
Observations A number of potential integrity breaches were identified relating to the SoCs.
Potential monopoly, conflict of interest and abuse of power
A former SoC Minister Shareholder Representative and former Commissioner
appears to be involved in a conflict of interest. This individual was reported to
have used their position in Government to force third parties to relinquish
businesses and property in order to establish family businesses as beneficiaries,
ultimately creating a monopoly with control over an industry at one of Sint
Maarten’s major ports of entry, according to reports from interviewees and
documents analyzed by the Inquiry team.
SoC contract apparently awarded to close relative of SoC Supervisory
Board Member without a bidding process
A SoC appears to have awarded a USD 2 million contract to a company owned by a
close relative of a Supervisory Board member and without conducting a formal
193
bidding process, according to interviewees with SoC officials. The Inquiry team
193
Contract Documents and interviews
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
189

policy that is applicable to all personnel, and clearly define conflict of interest
within the policy. Senior management and Supervisory Board members should be
required to fill out a conflict of interest declaration annually. Senior management
and Board members should also be required to disclose a potential conflict of
interest immediately upon identification to the CCO. The policy should be
published on each SoC website and easily accessible to all employees. The policy
should contain procedures for identifying, managing and resolving conflict of
interest situations and SoC officials should be clear on the protocol to report a
potential conflict of interest.
The Inquiry team recognizes the challenges associated with conflict of interest in a
country the size of Sint Maarten – which is all the more reason for strict adherence
to a conflict of interest policy. While the potential for a conflict of interest may be
unavoidable, there are many ways to manage the conflict appropriately to protect
the integrity of the decision-making body, which should be outlined in the conflict
of interest policy. If a conflict of interest arises, disclosure should be made and the
decision-making power should be transferred from the related official to an official
who does not have a conflict of interest. Furthermore, the official with the conflict
should be kept out of meetings, discussions, and correspondence related to the
interest in order to avoid any exertion of influence over decision-making. The
official with the conflict should sign an “agreement not to act” which the OECD
defines as, “the individual agrees not to participate in any other action concerning
196
the interest, e.g. signing documents that relate to the interest).” In some
circumstances, it may be necessary for the official with the conflict of interest to
divest of the interest that is resulting in the conflict in order to maintain integrity
and independent decision-making, which should be outlined in the conflict of
interest policy.
Failure of an employee to act upon a known conflict of interest should result in
timely and serious disciplinary action. Sanctions related to conflict of interest
should be clearly outlined in the policy.
196
Managing Conflict of Interest in the Public Service, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development;
https://web.archive.org/web/20140730221107/http://www.oecd.org/gov/ethics/48994419.pdf
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
191

9.2. State-owned companies priority recommendations
SoCs in Sint Maarten face considerable gaps in their integrity framework. Based on the assessment detailed
above, the Inquiry team assigned a “maturity finding” of “low,” “medium,” or “high” based on the
sophistication of the SoCs integrity compliance programs, policies, procedures, and practices in relation to
relevant global benchmarks. These maturity findings are captured in the diagram below:
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
193

Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
195

Interviewees and open source studies indicate that Sint Maarten is currently susceptible to
drug/arms trafficking due to its lack of oversight of imports, geographic location and reliance on
tourism. Concern over escalated violence in recent years due to a surplus of arms, particularly
imports of assault rifles, on the island was also noted by many interviewees.
 Organized crime: The Inquiry team received several reports that individuals identified to be
involved in organized crime are currently involved in private sector businesses in Sint Maarten,
especially in the gambling industry. The Inquiry team did not fully address these issues from a law
enforcement or policy prospective. The Inquiry team recommends a further assessment of the
capacity of Sint Maarten to investigate potential organized crime on the island.
 Crime fund: Although several interviewees mentioned that proceeds from the sale of seized assets
are placed into a crime fund, not one interviewee was able to tell us who is currently in control of the
crime fund or its value. The Inquiry team recommends an inquiry into the crime fund to determine
who has taken control of the fund, how much money is in it, where the proceeds from these seized
assets are deposited, and compliance with the law concerning the maintenance of the crime fund.
 Government background checks: The Inquiry team proposes to assess the adequacy and
effectiveness of the current background check procedure on civil servants, Ministers and politicians.
The assessment would include whether the GoSM has sufficient procedures to accurately identify
adverse and other information relevant to the subject’s criminal history, litigation, and qualifications
including educational degree verification.
 Long lease land and Government land distribution and re-sale: The Inquiry team
recommends conducting an assessment of long lease land sales to identify instances of illegal
profiting by recipients of long-lease land, including Government officials.
 Accuracy and quality of property appraisers in Sint Maarten: The Inquiry team reviewed
many integrity issues relating to property sales and purchases that included property appraisals.
There are a small number of property appraisers on the island, and these firms and individuals
should operate with integrity and provide fair and honest services to the GoSM, its SoCs and society
alike.
 Health insurance and SZV: Interviewees noted to the Inquiry team inefficiencies and quality
issues regarding SZV and the provision of health insurance. The Inquiry team recommends that the
GoSM perform a review of the social health insurance system in Sint Maarten in order to identify
gaps and areas for improvement.
 Foreign investment climate: An assessment of Sint Maarten’s foreign investment climate
compared with similar islands and environments should be conducted to identify areas for
improvement. Sint Maarten should encourage foreign investors in Sint Maarten.
 Water treatment: The Inquiry team recommends that an inquiry be done into the water quality in
Sint Maarten. Senior SoC officials indicated that a major water producer in Sint Maarten is not
producing the quality of water it has agreed in contracts it has executed with the GoSM. Further, SoC
officials reported that Sint Maarten’s main water distribution SoC has been locked into agreements
to distribute water of a higher quality than the distributor is required to produce. The Inquiry team
reviewed documents to support these claims, and it is suggested that this issue is reviewed during
future analysis.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
197

11. Conclusion
The readers of this assessment should understand that this exercise was not an investigation of specific acts
or allegations of corruption with a view towards assigning accountability. Such investigative activities are
more appropriately left within the purview of the police, prosecutors and the judiciary. Rather this
assessment was designed to (1) review the historical record of governance related procedures and practices
in Sint Maarten (and where necessary, areas of conduct by individuals or entities) to illuminate specific
institutional weaknesses in the GoSM’s public sector integrity architecture as compared to international
standards, and (2) to offer a road map of recommendations and priority milestones on how to mature this
architecture in a strategic fashion. This assessment is forward-looking and focused on prospective action
that can be taken to enhance the quality of the lives of the citizens of Sint Maarten.
The preceding Report has indicated that the maturity of the GoSM’s governance and public integrity
architecture is low. Sint Maarten now finds itself in a position similar to many emerging economies that
have been independently benchmarked and are seeking to develop leading practices in public sector
integrity to enhance economic prospects, attract foreign investment, and address long-standing domestic
political concerns, as well as improve their reputation and relationship with key international stakeholders.
This is not an easy task and is made all the more challenging by certain characteristics that are distinctive
to small island communities such as Sint Maarten, where dense social networks and relationships often
govern how business and politics are conducted and supersede formal rules and procedures. Although
developing a more mature integrity architecture in Sint Maarten will be challenging, it is achievable
through strategic investments aimed at addressing the recommendations identified in this Report.
Many of the key actions that need to be taken by the Government are achievable in a short period of time,
and indeed represent foundational steps in building a strong public integrity architecture. In fact, many of
the action items detailed in the Integrity Architecture Priority Milestones roadmap above are
activities that can be acted upon immediately by referring to international leading practices, templates, and
existing procedures and protocols. Adopting models available in the international community can help Sint
Maarten rapidly progress through many of the initial steps outlined in this assessment. For example,
enacting a Code of Conduct, promulgating detailed procurement rules, and installing training programs
can be accomplished quickly using internationally accepted standards without the need for much debate or
unnecessary expenditure of funds. Any delay in achieving these relatively easy initial tasks--or in creating a
PMO to coordinate Government reform efforts—will be highly visible and risks being viewed by civil society
as an indication of the level of political will within the GoSM to improve public sector integrity.
In addition to the initial progress that is easily achievable, the GoSM will have to demonstrate a sustained
political will and a commitment to enforcement in order to tackle the more challenging actions contained
in Integrity Architecture Priority Milestones roadmap such as enhanced financial transparency of
SoCs, audits of financial disclosures by political officials, and increased prosecutions of senior political
officials who have engaged in conflict of interests or outright corruption.
Full scale remediation of the institutional weaknesses noted in this Report may take years of effort by a
committed political leadership to achieve the standards of governance expected by the international
community. In addition to political will, the GoSM must also sustainably fund this initiative, staff it with
qualified people, and periodically test progress against international standards to determine the pace of
reform and development. The Government is not alone in this effort, and there are a plethora of
stakeholders that can and should be engaged to oversee that reforms undertaken are in line with leading
international practices, including Transparency International, the World Bank Institute, industry
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
199

Appendix A. - Glossary of terms and
acronyms
The table below reflects a glossary of terms used throughout the Report with the English term used in the
Report and the Dutch equivalent based on information obtained on the GoSM website.
English Dutch
Attorney-General Procureur-generaal
Board of Financial Supervision College Financieel Toezicht (“CFT”)
Cadaster Kadaster
Chamber of Commerce Kamer van Koophandel
Charter for the Kingdom Statuut voor het Koninkrijk
Civil Code of Sint Maarten Burgerlijk Wetboek
Code of Conduct Gedragscode
Code of Criminal Procedure Wetboek van Strafvordering
Common Court of Justice Gemeenschappelijk Hof van Jusitie
Constitution Staatsregeling
Council of Advice Raad van Advies
Council of Ministers Ministerraad
Court of first instance Gerecht van eerste aanleg van Sint Maarten
Criminal Code Wetboek van Strafrecht
Department of Interior and Kingdom Relations Afdeling Binnenlandse Aangelegenheden en
Koninkrijksrelaties (“BAK”)
Department of Public Prosecutions Openbaar Ministerie
Financial Intelligence Unit Melpunt Ongebruikelijke Transacties (“MOT”)
General Audit Chamber Algemene Rekenkamer
High Council of State Hoog College van Staat
Integrity Bureau Bureau Integriteit Sint Maarten (“BISM”)
Kingdom Act Rijkswet
Law Enforcement Council Raad voor de Rechtshandhaving
Limited Liability Company (“LLC”) Naamloze Vennootschap (“N.V.”)
Minister Plenipotentiary Gevolmachtigde Minister
Ministry of Education, Culture, Youth and Ministerie van Onderwijs, Cultuur, Jeugd en Sport
Sport (“OCJS”)
Ministry of Finance Ministerie van Financiën
Ministry of General Affairs Ministerie van Algemene Zaken
Ministry of Public Housing, Spatial Planning, Ministerie van Volkshuisvesting, Ruimtelijke Ordening,
Environment and Infrastructure Milieu en Infrastructuur (“VROMI”)
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
201

Corporate Governance Council CGC
National Committee on Money Laundering CIWG
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission COSO
Corruption Perception Index (published by Transparency International) CPI
Documentaire Informatievoorziening (“DIV”) DIV
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering FATF
Ministry of Finance Finance
N.V. Gemeenschappelijk Electriciteitsbedrijf Bovenwindse Eilanden GEBE
Ministry of General Affairs General Affairs
Government of Sint Maarten GoSM
Information and Communications Technology ICT
International Civil Aviation Organization ICAO
International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions INTOSAI
Ministry of Justice Justice
Mobile Control Unit MCU
Ministry of Education, Culture, Youth and Sports OCJS
Ministry of Tourism, Economic Affairs, Traffic and Telecommunication TEZVT
Ministry of Public Housing, Spatial Planning, Environment, and VROMI
Infrastructure
Ministry of Health, Social Development and Labor VSA
National Security Service Sint Maarten VDSM
Netherlands Antilles Development Foundation USONA
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development OECD
Open Government Partnership OGP
Personnel and Organization P&O
Public Financial Management Performance Measurement Framework PEFA
Princess Juliana International Airport Operating Company N.V. PJIAE
Prime Minister PM
Project Management Office PMO
Standards to Secure and Facilitate Global Trade SAFE
Secretary General SG
Simpson Bay Lagoon Authority Corporation SLAC
Sint Maarten Harbour Holding Company N.V. SMHHC
State-owned Company SoC
Third Country Nationals TCN
Sint Maarten Telecommunication Holding Company N.V. Telem
Trafficking Victims Protection Act TVPA
United Nations Convention Against Corruption UNCAC
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law UNCITRAL
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
203

Appendix B. - Global standards considered
When assessing the integrity of a Government and SoCs, it is important to measure current frameworks against recognized and accepted leading global standards. As a
result of a large anti-corruption movement, there are many leading integrity standards that have emerged, in addition to practices and procedures that are
promulgated in authoritative publications and professional forums. These frameworks are in the form of principles of leading laws, regulations, standards, and/or
authoritative guidance ranging from the United Nations Convention against Corruption (“UNCAC”) to the World Economic Forum’s Partnering Against Corruption
Initiative. The Inquiry team consulted the following global standards and leading practices when formulating observations and recommendations for GoSM’s and
SoCs’ current integrity architecture. A brief description of each standard is included below.
Global standards and leading practices underlying the Inquiry team’s integrity architecture
assessment framework
Promulgating organization Standard / Guidelines / Leading practice Description
Committee of Sponsoring Internal Control – Integrated Framework The 2013 Framework is expected to help organizations design and
Organizations of the Treadway (2013) implement internal controls, broaden the application of internal
Commission control in addressing operations and reporting objectives, and clarify
the requirements for determining what constitutes effective internal
control.
Council of Europe Model Code of Conduct for Public Officials The Council of Europe Model Code of Conduct for Public Officials
outlines expectations and standards of behavior for public officials
serving within countries belonging to the Council of Europe. The Code
provides guidance on conflicts of interest, asset disclosure, acceptance
of gifts, improper influence, abuse of power, and other key issues
related to establishing the highest standards of integrity for public
officials.
Crime Prevention & Consumer Protection in This standard by the European Gaming Association discusses the
European Casino Association
the Gambling Sector prevention of illegal activities as well as the protection of consumers of
the gaming industry. The standard touches on criminal activity
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
205

Promulgating organization Standard / Guidelines / Leading practice Description
corruption-free system that allows all participants to compete on a
198
level playing field. Specific topics the standard touches upon include
policies and procedures, relationships with third parties, and financial
recording an auditing.
International Organization of INTOSAI 9100 Guidelines for Internal Control
The INTOSAI Guidelines focus on three broad issues: (1) Definition of
Supreme Audit Institutions Standards for the Public Sector
Internal Control and limitations on internal control effectiveness, (2)
Components of Internal Control (Control Environment, Risk
Assessment, Control Activities, Information and Communications,
Monitoring), and (3) Roles and Responsibilities of relevant
stakeholders. The Guidelines take into account all relevant and recent
evolutions in internal control and incorporate information from the
COSO report "Internal Control – Integrated Framework."
Organisation for Economic Asset Declaration for Public Officials Toolkit This toolkit provides an analysis of existing practices in the area of
Cooperation and Development asset declarations in Eastern Europe and Central Asia and in some
(“OECD”) OECD countries in Western Europe and North America. It presents
policy recommendations on the key elements of asset declaration
systems that can provide guidance to national governments engaged in
the development, reform and assessment of asset declarations systems
at the country level.
Organisation for Economic Convention on Combating the Bribery of Established in 1997 as the first international anti-corruption
Cooperation and Development Foreign Public Officials in International instrument focused on the ‘supply side’ of bribery, the OECD
(“OECD”) Business Transactions Convention is aimed at reducing corruption by encouraging sanctions
against bribery in international business transactions carried out by
companies based in countries that are party to the Convention. The
198
Combating Extortion and Bribery: ICC Rules of Conduct and Recommendations, International Chamber of Commerce; http://www.iccwbo.org/Advocacy-Codes-and-Rules/Document-centre/2004/ICC-
Rules-of-Conduct-and-Recommendations-to-Combat-Extortion-and-Bribery-(2005-Edition)
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
207

Promulgating organization Standard / Guidelines / Leading practice Description
identified good practices from governments in various regions of the
world.
Organisation for Economic
Principles of Corporate Governance OECD’s Principles of Corporate Governance is a leading global
Cooperation and Development
standard for corporate governance practices that provides guidance to
(“OECD”)
policy makers, investors, corporations and other stakeholders to
enhance and support financial market stability, investment and
200
economic growth.
Open Government Partnership Open Government Partnership OGP was launched in 2011 to provide an international platform for
(“OGP”) domestic reformers committed to making their governments
more open, accountable, and responsive to citizens. The OGP is a
multilateral initiative that aims to secure concrete commitments from
governments to promote transparency, empower citizens, fight
corruption, and harness new technologies to strengthen governance.
To become a member of OGP, participating countries must endorse a
high-level Open Government Declaration, deliver a country action
plan developed with public consultation, and commit to independent
201
reporting on their progress going forward.
Organization of American Model Law on the Declaration of Interests, The Model Law was developed through an extensive consultation
States (“OAS”) Income, Assets and Liabilities of Persons process involving representatives of countries belonging to the OAS,
Performing Public Functions and was endorsed by the Committee of Experts of the MESICIC (the
body charged with monitoring implementation of the Inter-American
Convention Against Corruption). The Model Law covers key principles
related to establishing a robust asset declaration regime for public
officials.
200
OECD Principles of Corporate Governance, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; http://www.oecd.org/daf/ca/corporategovernanceprinciples/31557724.pdf
201
Open Government Partnership; http://www.opengovpartnership.org
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
209

Promulgating organization Standard / Guidelines / Leading practice Description
Supervision that gambling establishments are not used for money laundering.
UK Gambling Commission Gambling License Conditions and Codes of This document outlines the principal licensing conditions for gambling
Practice establishments in the UK as well as codes of practice for casinos and
personnel involved in the gambling industry.
This document outlines the key principles and safeguards that casinos
UK Gambling Commission Money Laundering: the Prevention of Money
should follow to prevent money laundering and the financing of
Laundering and Combating the Financing of
terrorism.
Terrorism
United Nations United Nations Convention Against Corruption UNCAC is a comprehensive global treaty providing framework for
203
(“UNCAC”) collective action against corruption. It was adopted by the UN
General Assembly in 2003 and 133 countries are parties to the
convention as of April 2009. The convention calls for government
transparency and accountability, regulation of private sector, and
improved civil society participation. Some provisions of the UNCAC
are mandatory while others are discretionary.
United Nations United Nations International Code of Conduct The United Nations International Code of Conduct for Public Officials
for Public Officials presents key principles related to conflicts of interest, asset disclosure,
acceptance of gifts and favors, protection of confidential information,
and political activity. The Code was adopted by the UN General
Assembly in 1997.
United Nations United Nations Convention Against The UNTOC entered into force in 2003, and requires parties to
Transnational Organized Crime (“UNTOC”) establish in their domestic laws four criminal offences: participation in
an organized criminal group; money laundering; corruption; and
203
United Nations Convention Against Corruption, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; https://www.unodc.org/documents/treaties/UNCAC/Publications/Convention/08-50026_E.pdf
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
211

Appendix C. - Key relevant findings
from previous assessments and reports
A number of previous assessments were reviewed by the Inquiry team as part of desk research process. Key
findings from those assessments are included below. These findings were considered by the Inquiry team during
the assessment as well as in the formulation of recommendations.
General Audit Chamber’s Baseline Study of Institutional Integrity
Management in Sint Maarten
The General Audit Chamber released a Baseline Study of Institutional Integrity Management for Sint Maarten
in March 2014. This report was based on a review of all published laws and National Ordinances related to
integrity since October 10, 2010. This review was supplemented with responses from a web-based questionnaire
and interviews with a limited number of government officials. Several key gaps in Sint Maarten’s integrity
management identified in the report include:
 Lack of specific rules and regulations to implement integrity-related laws and policies;
 Lack of uniformity across Ministries with respect to the implementation of integrity-related policies;
 Insufficient awareness and understanding among civil servants of their obligations under relevant codes
of conduct; and
 Uncertainty regarding which government agencies and departments are responsible for integrity
management within the civil service.
Of particular relevance to the current Integrity Inquiry are the General Audit Chamber’s observations regarding
the Council of Ministers and Civil Service. The primary observations are listed below:
Council of Ministers
 Sufficient screening procedures are in place to prevent conflicts of interest from arising among Ministers;
 Insufficient clarity regarding the rules governing the acceptance of gifts by Ministers;
 Ministers in the current government have complied with the National Ordinance requiring disclosure of
business interests and assets, though Ministers from the former government failed to disclose this
information upon leaving office as required by law; and
 There is no formal integrity Code of Conduct governing the behavior of Ministers.
Civil service
 The wide variety of answers received from civil servants in response to the General Audit Chamber’s
integrity survey may indicate a lack of uniformity in the awareness and understanding of integrity issues
within the civil service;
 Roughly half of the civil servants who responded to the integrity survey did not believe there were
sufficient rules and regulations to implement existing integrity laws and policies;
 Almost half of the civil servants who responded to the survey were not aware of their obligations under
relevant codes of conduct;
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
213

Financial Intelligence Unit, the Tax Office and the Customs service face staffing constraints which limit their
ability to track money.
Violent crime: Violence on Sint Maarten includes: violence in public places, assault, murder and homicide,
domestic violence and vice crimes. The KLPD assess that public violence statistics may not represent the totality
of the criminal acts on the island. The young perpetrators of many crimes create the impression that their use of
weapons is increasing violence and becoming more serious. The gaps in information available to the KLPD’
limited their ability to confirm if the frequency or severity of crimes is increasing.
Fraud: Sint Maarten’s current systems contain minimal fiscal monitoring with facilitates fraudulent activity.
Health insurance fraud among the migrant population is the primary source of fraud. Many illegal migrants
succeed in obtaining health insurance using a fake employer’s statement. The report estimates that health
insurance fraud costs the Sint Maarten government millions of dollars annually.
Document forgery: Illegal workers on the island use forged documents for insurance, residence permits and
building permits.
Corruption and other breaches of integrity: Sint Maarten, in the past three years, has confronted
corruption among public servants, to include within the highest ranks of the public administration. Allegations
regularly surface on social media of senior government officials and the police abusing their power.
The KLPD’s key recommendations are to improve the information exchange among Sint Maarten government
bodies to better identify and prosecute crimes, to train government entities to combat fraud and corruption to
include building mechanisms into their procedures, to allocate resources to combat corruption at all levels
within the Sint Maarten government, and to provide adequate resources law enforcement to control human
smuggling and the drug trade.
Detentiecapaciteit – Sint Maarten Detention Capacity Report
The Sint Maarten Law Enforcement Council performed a study in December 2013 to define the current state of
the detention system, to quantify the detention capacity shortage on the island and to identify the associated
consequences from the shortage. The Council concludes that “a state under the rule of law, in which judgments
form judges are not executed, undermines itself.” In creating this report, the Council was hampered by
insufficient information to accurately quantify the capacity shortage.
The Council made the following observations:
 In Sint Maarten, a detention shortage exists and is the result of the law enforcement process. Sint
Maarten is reactive in expanding its detention capacity instead of creating a lasting solution.
 The report relies on information from 2008 until 2012 to determine how frequently the judiciary imposed
unconditional sentences on adults, young adults and youths. The Council assessed that 40% of prison
sentences could not executed and based on a cautious estimate, Sint Maarten needs 251 additional cells.
 The Council believes that it is important to implement Constitutional provisions “about separated
detention and treatment of convicted persons, non-convicted person and youths,” which will mandate
additional cells.
 The Council assesses that the increase in serious offenses by minors and young adults mandate not only
more cells but alternative punishment to prison sentences.
Based on the Council’s research, they presented the following recommendations to the Justice Minister: build
additional cells; implement legal provisions to separate detained individuals, convicted individuals, not
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
215

Caribbean Financial Action Task Force: Mutual Evaluation Report
Caribbean Financial Action Task Force (“CFATF”) released a mutual evaluation report on Anti-Money
Laundering and Combating the Financial of Terrorism in Sint Maarten in January 2013. CFATF relied on the
2003 Forty Recommendation and the Nine Special Recommendations on Terrorist Financing 2001 from the
Financial Action Task force to evaluate and to create the anti-money laundering (AML) and combating the
financing of terrorism (CFT) framework. CFATF relied on laws and regulations provided by the Sint
government as well as in-person interviews conducted on March 19 through March 30 2012.
Of particular interest to Sint Maarten’s anti-money laundering and terrorism financing includes the following:
General risk: Sint Maarten’s location, tourism industry, logistical accessibility, mobility of goods and services
make the island a good location for illegal activities such as drug trafficking, human trafficking and money
laundering (ML). Non-bank financial institutions are vulnerable to money launderers and terrorists as they seek
to launder their funds derived from criminal activities. This approach is not in accordance with the Terrorism
Financing Convention.
The Central Bank regulates and supervises the financial services sector in Sint Maarten although the anti-money
laundering and combating the financing of terrorism regime does not regulate the following activities: financial
leasing, financial guarantees and commitments; participation in securities issues and the provision of financial
services.
The CFAFT identified the following gaps in legislative requirement: customer due diligence (CDD) during wire
transfers; CDD on the suspicion of ML or TF, mandatory customer identification data and continuous due
diligence on business relationships.
Sint Maarten cooperates with international partners; however law enforcement entities need to provide better
international cooperation with their foreign counterparts. The law enforcement agencies possess a shortage of
qualified officers who are trained in ML investigations.
Legal systems and related institutional measure: The Penal Code only applies to a person who commits
ML crimes inside Sint Maarten. Sint Maarten’s penal code criminalizes most predicate offenses identified by
FATF; although it is missing laws on illicit arms trafficking, smuggling and insider trading, market
manipulation, and some environmental crimes.
Sint Maarten’s legal system includes the seizure and freezing of funds and other assets criminally and
administratively to include adhering to terrorism related United Nation Security Council Resolutions (UNSCR).
The Sint Maarten’s AML/CFT framework for the financial sector includes National Ordinances and executive
decrees, regulations, provisions and guidelines that state that the FIs must at least consider the following risks,
and develop and update profiles: (i) customer risk, (ii) products/services risk, (iii) country or geographic risk,
and (iv) delivery channels risk.
National and international cooperation: The Attorney General will chair the soon to be installed National
Committee on Money Laundering (“CIWG”) with representation from the Office for Legislation and Legal
Affairs, the Office for Foreign Affairs, the Central Bank, the FIU, the banking and insurance sector. CFAFT was
unable to assess the CIWG’s effectiveness as it is currently being built.
Notaries: Sint Maarten has five notaries who “provide legal and public faith to private acts and contracts, and
oversee the wording of public instruments based on the will of the parties”.
After a general agreement is implemented, the notary is responsible for recognizing and authenticating specific
documents issued by the notary’s office to include information on the status and capacity of a person; issues the
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
217

5. Competition, value for money and control in procurement
6. Timeliness and regularities of accounts reconciliations
7. Spending by education and medical institutions
8. Quality and timeliness financial statements
9. Scope and nature of recommendations by the General Audit Chamber
10. Oversight Parliament on the budget process
11. Oversight Parliament on report of the General Audit Chamber
General Audit Chamber Sint Maarten Financial Compliance 2012
and selected GoSM Financial Statements
The report provides the results of the financial compliance audit on the financial statements of Sint Maarten as
well as the operations of the government of Sint Maarten. The General Audit Chamber concludes the following:
1. The financial statements do not comply with the National Financial Accounting Ordinance (CV) and the
National Ordinance General Audit Chamber. There is a lack of internal controls that cause deviations
between the budget and actual spending as well as material errors in the financial statement.
2. Ministries of Sint Maarten are not ‘in control’ of their operations. Important improvement plans have not
been implemented, amongst other the new Tax Office and the budget process.
3. The financial statements contain insufficient information for users, such as the people of Sint Maarten
and the Kingdom of The Netherlands, to form an opinion on the extent to which the government has
executed policy.
The General Audit Chamber states that there have been no improvements as compared to the 2011 financial
statements and considers objecting against Ministers if there are no improvements in financial year 2013.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
219

210
owner of a local adult entertainment club. The article stated that the Dutch newspaper, Telegraaf, reported,
“based on sources,” that the recording captured the MP stating that the former Minister was unable to be there
himself, but that the MP was explicitly acting on the former Minister’s orders. The article also notes that the
bribe could have been for a permit for the club owner to open a new brothel.
In a following investigation, the former Minister was reportedly questioned as a witness by the head of the
National Detective Agency (Landsrecherche) and the Chief Prosecutor at the time, according to open source
211
press reports. The same article noted that the MP was collecting a bribe of 15,000 (unspecified currency)
from the club’s owner. Another media article mentioned that the former Minister was questioned concerning
bribes between the MP and the club owner for favors including “permits for prostitutes, business licenses and
212
firearms.”
Case developments
The former Minister appeared to have resigned from his position as in May 2013 after “being accused by other
213
MPs of nepotism and corruption,” according to a post on an international news website. A May 8, 2014 article
indicated that this investigation was going to court and also reported that a Prosecutor mentioned the MP was
214
to be charged with accepting bribes. It is noted that the former Minister was not mentioned in these reports.
Former Minister appears to have links to brothels
The former Minister was identified as an owner of two companies that were listed in the roles of Managing
Directors of a third company that reportedly operates a brothel (the “Operator”) in Sint Maarten using the
license of a fourth company (the “Licensee”), according to an open source press report from November 15,
215
2012. A March 2013 press report indicated that a Ministry of Justice document containing an overview of Sint
Maarten’s prostitution policy cited 12 companies as holding a license for a “brothel or a strip club” including the
216
operator and the licensee.
MP investigation
The first mentions in media of the bribery accusations against the MP appear to be in March 2013. A press
report from that month that reported on the footage of the MP allegedly accepting a bribe from the club owner
indicated that a majority of the Second Chamber of the Dutch Parliament supported an investigation into the
217
apparent allegations that took place in the video. Another article from March 2013 reported that Sint Maarten
authorities had conducted searches of the MP and the adult entertainment club where the alleged bribe took
218
place. The same article mentioned that the Chief Prosecutor at the time had issued a statement confirming
that during the search of the MP’s home a 29-year-old man was arrested on charges of illegal weapon
possession. The article also reports that in the video, which shows the MP putting “stacks of money into his
pockets” that the club owner had removed from a safe, the MP and the club owner were heard talking about
documents needed to secure permits for the club and for dancers.
210
Today, March 8, 2013
211
Today, March 19, 2013
212
St. Martin News Network, April 25, 2013
213
The Economist, May 30 2013
214
The Daily Herald, May 8, 2014
215
Today, November 15, 2012
216
Today, March 13, 2013
217
West Indies News Network, March 8, 2013
218
Fox News, March 9, 2013
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
221

calling a public session, by bringing and questioning [the MP, the Club owner, the former Minister,
226
and chief of immigration], and others in a public session.”
It is noted that the MP reportedly participated in a meeting on integrity in June 2014 during the Inter-
Parliamentary Kingdom Consultation (“IPKO”) in The Hague, according to reports made to the Inquiry team.
Many interviewees expressed concern to the Inquiry team that following the video showing the MP allegedly
accepting a bribe from the owner of a brothel, the Parliamentarian was still allowed to attend this meeting on
integrity.
Minister involved in sale of long-lease land
Local media, blog posts, and other open sources detail a case regarding accusations against the former Minister
of Labor and Health, and her husband, for allegedly selling long lease land owned by the government for a profit
of USD 3 million. A December 15, 2010 article reported that the Sint Maarten Minister of Labor and Health at
the time and her husband proceeded to “manipulate the legal terms of the lease by selling the economic value of
the property for a whopping” USD 3 million and also noted that the terms of the lease included that the lessee is
227
not authorized to transfer or sub-lease the rights of the long lease land.
A December 30, 2010 article added that on the date of the article, the former Minister had submitted a letter to
the Prime Minister of Sint Maarten stating that the former Minister would resign her position effective January
228
1, 2011, allegedly due to the scandal involving the sale of the parcel of government land. This article also
reported the Prime Minister had fired the former Minister, with an undated letter informing her that she would
no longer be Minister as of January 1, 2011. The article reported the buyer to be an entity which had been
established three days prior to the sale of land. The previously mentioned article from December 15, 2010
included a copy of the former Minister’s Deed of Land Transfer to the buyer, the entity, which identifies the
former Minister and her husband as selling the property to the Managing Director of the entity for USD 3
229
million. This article noted that the Prosecutor’s Office had received some documentation, but had yet to make
a decision on whether or not to investigate the matter further.
Public sentiment
On December 9, 2010, a Sint Maarten news outlet published a letter from a reader addressed to the President of
the Parliament of Sint Maarten at the time, in which the author called for an open demand for the President to
230
start an immediate parliamentary investigation into the sale of the long-lease land by the former Minister.
The letter states that “after hearing the out-pour of heart-wrenching cries of the people-, with a sense of the
highest urgency-, our St. Martin grassroots movement-, hereby makes a demand on you-, to immediately open a
parliamentary investigation on all the circumstances surrounding the reported sale of Government long-lease
land-, by [the former Minister and her husband].”
Current status
A December 11, 2011 article in a Sint Maarten newspaper noted that a criminal investigation into the former
Minister is still “high on the Public Prosecutor’s Office’s list,” according to one Prosecutor, who was also quoted
as saying “there are sufficient grounds for it, but we are still in the situation we were in a year ago – a lack of
226
St. Maarten Island Time.com, March 17, 2013
227
St. Martin News Network, December 15, 2010
228
St. Martin News Network, December 20, 2010
229
Id.
230
St. Martin News Network, December 9, 2010
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
223

Dutch Member of Parliament inquiries
On September 21, 2010, a Dutch Labor Party (Partij van de Arbeid or “PvdA”) Member of Parliament,
submitted a list of questions for the Dutch Secretary of the Interior and Kingdom Relations regarding possible
vote buying, including the exchange of votes for computers, payment of school fees, rent, electricity bills,
237
refrigerators and building blocks.
In the same document, the Dutch Labor Party MP mentioned two articles which alleged improper conduct—one
in the Curacao newspaper Antilliaans Dagblad (published on September 17, 2010) and the other in the Dutch
newspaper NRC Handelsblad (published on September 18, 2010). Research was unable to identify the original
articles mentioned by Recourt. However, a September 20, 2010 news article in a Sint Maarten news outlet
summarizes these articles, referring to “reports that the UP Party [United People’s Party] ‘bought votes on a
238
large scale.’” In the same summary of the two articles, it states that the former Minister of Justice “said that
[the UP party leader] had restored the old methods of his grandfather…by buying votes.”
A November 4, 2010 Letter to the Editor published in a Sint Maarten news outlet encouraged the Sint Maarten
Minister of Justice to answer the Dutch Labor Party MP’s questions: “The current Minister of Justice…should
indicate what his views are now since he has now joined the UP/DP government. Are they the same? Will he
pursue justice and investigate his own claims? Are we certain that our current Minister of Justice will live up to
the oath taken to serve and protect our country when he has now teamed UP with the same questionable UP
239
party?”
Internal police investigation of vote buying
A November 2, 2010 article in a Sint Maarten news outlet reported that the Sint Maarten Police Force began an
internal investigation on September 21, 2010 after the Dutch Labor Party MP inquired about possible
240 241
misconduct and that the investigation was completed on February 14, 2013.
A February 12, 2014 article in a Sint Maarten news outlet reported that five suspects in the vote-rigging case
242
were summoned to court for a hearing on February 17, 2014. The same article noted that four police officers
were charged with accepting or attempting to accept 300 (currency unspecified) for their vote and one UP
representative would be charged for paying the aforementioned police officers. At the February 17, 2014
hearing, the judge “ordered the Prosecutor’s Office to reopen the investigations where the involvement of UP
party leadership was concerned” due to “contradictory statements where UP’s involvement in the alleged fraud
was concerned.” In the same article, the judge summarized that “the Prosecutor’s Office had stated it could not
be established that the UP party had bribed or attempted to bribe persons.” The case is due to resume on August
4, 2014.
237
“Questions from the Member Recourt (PvdA) to the Secretary of the Interior and Kingdom Relations on the massive vote buying in
elections in St. Maarten,” Government of the Netherlands, submitted on 21 September 2010.
238
The Daily Herald, September 20, 2010.
239
St. Martin News Network, November 4, 2010
240
The Daily Herald, November 2, 2010
241
The Daily Herald, April 15, 2014
242
The Daily Herald, February 12, 2014
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
225

Investigation of fraudulent transactions
According to media reports the former Minister of Finance was “suspected of committing fraud when he paid
250
Global Advisory Services double for services the company provided to the Government of St. Maarten.”
Global Advisory Services (“GAS”) was reportedly involved in recruiting personnel for various Sint Maarten
government agencies, including the Tax Department, between 2009 and 2011, per open source press reports in
251
December 2012. During this time, GAS’ owner allegedly submitted falsified bills on behalf of GAS and “[the
Finance Minister] allegedly made it possible for [the GAS owner] to favour himself with money from the
252
government coffers,” according to an April 25, 2014 article in a Sint Maarten news publication. In facilitating
these fraudulent transactions, the former Finance Minister allegedly violated the Accountability Ordinance
(Comptabiliteitslandsverordening) in what “constitutes misconduct as a civil servant in connection with the
253
payment of falsified bills” and cost the GoSM ANG 233,054, per the same source.
According to December 2012 news reports, the owner of GAS is also a former head of Sint Maarten’s Finance
Department as well as a member of the board, co-manager, and financial administrator for Windward Islands
254
Airways.
Case developments
Police executed searches of the owner of GAS’ office in Sint Maarten and in two offices in Curacao on August 14,
2012 before the Special Investigation Unit arrested him on December 3, 2012 and placed him under pretrial
255
detention, according to Sint Maarten news reports from December 2012 and April 2014. The former finance
Minister was arrested and questioned by Sint Maarten police days later on December 17, 2012 and released on
256
December 24, 2012, according to December 2012 news reports.
According to multiple local news sources, the National Detectives completed their investigation on June 23, 201,
and, on April 24, 2014, both the former Minister of Finance and GAS’ owner were formally charged with fraud,
embezzlement, forgery and money-laundering in a preliminary hearing (also known as “regiezitting”) and are
257 258
scheduled to go to trial on October 29, 2014, according to an April 2014 press report.
A January 2014 article noted that, as of the date of publication, the former Minister of Finance had been
collecting pension payments since he left office, including the period during which he was under formal
259
investigation, and had, as of January 2014, received more than ANG 202,000.
Public sentiment on effectiveness of justice system
In covering the former Minister of Finance’s pre-trial detention hearing, a local media outlet noted on
December 28, 2012 that “irregularities […] were observed during the pre-trial detention hearing” remarking
250
St. Martin News Network, December 17, 2012
251
Today, December 5, 2012; St. Martin News Network, December 17, 2012
252
The Daily Herald, April 25, 2014
253
It is noted that media sources provide conflicting figures for the amount of money defrauded. An April 25, 2014 The Daily Herald article
identifies the exact amount as ANG 233,054. However, an April 22, 2013 St. Martin News Network article and an April 23, 2014 AVS News
Online.com article identifies the amount as “over [ANG] 235,000.”
254
St. Martin News Network, December 17, 2012; The Daily Herald, December 5, 2012; St. Martin News Network, December 28, 2012
255
Today, December 5, 2012; St. Martin News Network, April 22, 2014
256
Today, December 18, 2012; West Indies News Network, December 19, 2012
257
The Daily Herald, April 25, 2014; AVSNewsOnline.com, April 23, 2014
258
The Daily Herald, April 25, 2014
259
Today, January 16, 2014
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
227

267
according to an October 2013 article. The former Minister of TEZVT’s decision to reverse the suspensions
happened hours before the Suspects were scheduled to initiate a suit against the government to have their
268
suspensions reversed, per December 2010 and April 2011 news reports. In addition to lifting the suspensions,
the former Minister of TEZVT also offered to compensate the Suspects ANG 1,500 each for injunction
procedures the two had initiated against the government in administrative court, according to a December 2010
269
article.
The complaint and the allegations
Approximately three weeks after the Suspects’ suspensions, on November 25, 2010, the former Head of Finance
filed a criminal complaint against the two Suspects, as reported by news and blog sources in April 2011 and
270
October 2013. Elaborating on the details of the case, the former Minister of TEZVT noted that “discrepancies
were uncovered by the Finance Department prior to September 2010 and were reported to the then finance
271
commissioner. The process was left to be completed,” according to a November 6, 2010 article. According to
an October 24, 2013 article, the details surrounding the aforementioned discrepancies have never been clarified
publicly and officially by authorities, although speculation “pointed to financial discrepancies found with funds
272
allotted to the Tourism Bureau.”
On November 5, 2010, local media claimed in an article that the investigation was initiated by then-Minister of
Finance and that there were allegations that one of the Suspects had charged her travel expenses to a New York
tourist office while simultaneously receiving travel allowances from the GoSM for her trips to represent or
promote the island. The article also suggested that this Suspect may be “somehow attached to a company…that
is contracted by the tourist office,” but noted that it was not possible to determine if the Suspect was a
273
shareholder of the company based on a review of Chamber of Commerce records.
However, according to an opinion piece that was published on June 13, 2011, the complaints filed by the Head
of Finance allege that the Suspects as well as the former Tourism Commissioner had embezzled government
funds by receiving approximately USD 300 a day for government-related travel expenses when in fact they had
274
not left the island.
A blog piece posted on April 6, 2011, citing information from an unidentified “inside source,” provided a slightly
different version of the allegations, stating that
“In October 2o1o, someone allegedly ran to [the Head of Finance], to snitch out [the Suspects]. Evidently, they
were double dipping, or taking funds (up to $400) per day of their government stipends. [The Head of
Finance], according to an inside source, promptly turned the documents over to the guy who hired
him...[who] could not turn over the documents to the prosecutor, because it also held incriminating evidence
about…the National Alliance [party] number 2 guy. [The individual who hired the Head of Finance], of course
275
was still on the National Alliance slate, after the NA had “accidently” given him a ‘No Confidence’ vote.”
267
The Daily Herald, October 24, 2013
268
St. Martin News Network, December 2, 2010; The Daily Herald, April 4, 2011
269
Id.
270
The Daily Herald, October 24, 2013; SXM Police (sxmpolice.wordpress.com), October 23, 2013; Dutch Caribbean Legal Portal, April 12,
2011
271
The Daily Herald, November 6, 2010
272
The Daily Herald, October 24, 2013
273
St. Martin News Network, November 5, 2010
274
Today, June 13, 2011
275
SXM Politico, April 6, 2011
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
229

Public sentiment
A June 25, 2014 blog post criticized the alleged disappearance of some media articles on the subject, stating the
following
“The Tourism Bureau Scandal, like the [vote buying case] has been going on for a few years. Now that
they are once again questioning [the former Tourism Commissioner and the Suspects] - the question is
why has all ‘The Daily Herald’s’ online documentation of the event been removed? Do you pay a fee to
The Daily Herald in order to get them to remove incriminating stories about you online? Well
considering I save and archive all court cases, government cases online – I can bring you all original
details and documents from when this was first triggered by [the Head of Finance] approx. three years
282
ago.”
National Security Service investigation
Investigation of irregularities at the VDSM
Signs of financial irregularities at the National Security Service Sint Maarten (“VDSM”) began to surface in April
283
2013, according to a September 12, 2013 article. Responding to these issues, on July 8, 2013, the Prime
Minister (“PM”) announced that the Stichting Overheidsaccountantsbureau (“SOAB”) had initiated an
investigation of the VDSM’s books to determine “if there was inappropriate or misuse of funds,” according to a
284
July 2013 article published by a local media outlet. The PM also placed the head of the VDSM, “on suspension
the moment [she] initiated the investigation,” per the same source.
In the July 2013 article, the media outlet claimed to have learned from “well place sources” that “the VDSM was
given monies as their budget for their operations even though the oversight committee was not functioning” and
that the VDSM has made a request to the Ministry of Finance for additional funding “even though they [VDSM]
285
did not provide government with their financials on the monies they were granted prior.”
According to June 2014 article, the PM later acknowledged that a “significant amount of money” from the
286
VDSM budget was “unaccounted for,” but “never confirmed the exact amount.” The article noted that “stories
floated around suggested that $800,000 [currency unspecified] from the VDSM-budget had disappeared.” A
July 2013 article noted that “certain people are saying that the VDSM embezzled between [ANG] 100,000.00 to
287
[ANG] 500,000.00 but that is yet to be proven.”
A September 2013 article stated that SOAB’s investigation concluded that “there were irregularities with regard
to money that should have been used for operations” and recommended that the head of VDSM have the
288
opportunity “to substantiate or give elucidations” on SOAB’s findings. However, as of June 2014, “the results
289
of this investigation have never been made public,” per the June 2014 article.
282
SXMGovernment.com St. Maarten News, June 5, 2014
283
Today, September 12, 2013
284
St. Martin News Network, July 16, 2013
285
Id.
286
Today, June 1, 2014
287
St. Martin News Network, July 16, 2013
288
Today, September 12, 2013
289
Today, June 1, 2014
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
231

Recent developments
A January 30, 2014 article reported that the PM confirmed that she had submitted SOAB’s investigation report
to the Prosecutor’s Office in December 2013 but had not heard from the Prosecutor’s Office, nothing that “it’s
that office that has to take a decision as to how they will move forward.” The article also stated that, as of the
date of publication, the head of VDSM was still under suspension and that he “was moving to court to challenge
297
the decision of government.”
A June 2014 article noted that the head of VDSM “will definitely not return to his position” as the head of the
298
VDSM and that a vacancy ad for the position had been published on May 30, 2014.
Separately, a November 2013 article noted that a closed door Central Committee session of the House of
Parliament was scheduled to be held on November 06, 2013 to discuss “recent developments related to the
299
VDSM including the suspension of the Head of the agency,” but did not provide further details.
297
St. Martin News Network, January 30, 2014
298
Today, June 1, 2014
299
St. Martin Island Time.com, November 4, 2013
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
233

Leading program Council of Europe Model Code of Gaps
Sint Maarten Government
301
element Conduct
Code of Conduct
private interests of yourself or of with the citizens he or she serves, as well serves, as well as in his or her relations with his or
third parties; as in his or her relations with his or her her superiors, colleagues and subordinate staff.
superiors, colleagues and subordinate
• You are obliged to accept a study staff. The GoSM’s Code of Conduct does not mention that
assignment given to you as well as a public officials who believe he or she is being
business trip; Article 12 – Reporting required to act in a way which is unlawful, improper
or unethical, which involves maladministration, or
• If you are prevented by illness or 1. The public official who believes he or which is otherwise inconsistent with this Code,
another reason from executing your she is being required to act in a way should report the matter in accordance with the law.
task, you are obliged to inform your which is unlawful, improper or
supervisor of this on a timely basis, unethical, which involves The GoSM’s Code of Conduct does not require public
by reasoned motivation. maladministration, or which is officials to, in accordance with the law, report to the
otherwise inconsistent with this Code, competent authorities if he or she becomes aware of
Additional job: should report the matter in accordance breaches of this Code by other public officials.
with the law.
• You are obliged to inform your The GoSM’s Code of Conduct does not have language
department head in the event of 2. The public official should, in to ensure public officials whom have reported
performing side jobs. accordance with the law, report to the breaches of the code in accordance with the law and
competent authorities if he or she believe that the response does not meet his or her
• No permission shall be given to becomes aware of breaches of this Code concern should report the matter in writing to the
accept a side job or to perform by other public officials. relevant head of the public service.
additional functions, if this may
harm the performance of one’s 3. The public official who has reported The GoSM’s Code of Conduct does not include
duties, is not in agreement with the any of the above in accordance with the language to support that if a matter cannot be
standing of the office. law and believes that the response does resolved by the procedures and appeals set out in the
not meet his or her concern may report legislation on the public service on a basis acceptable
Uniforms: the matter in writing to the relevant to the public official concerned, the public official
head of the public service. should carry out the lawful instructions he or she has
• You are obliged to wear your been given.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
235

Leading program Council of Europe Model Code of Gaps
Sint Maarten Government
301
element Conduct
Code of Conduct
official, unless lawfully authorized to do integrity of the candidate are carried out as lawfully
• You are open in regards to your so. required.
working method. You are
accountable for your method of 2. The public official should not seek to If the result of any such check makes him or her
working and your attitude to influence for private purposes any uncertain as to how to proceed, he or she should seek
colleagues. person or body, including other public appropriate advice.
officials, by using his or her official
• In the event of doubt or questions position or by offering them personal The public official who supervises or manages other
in regards to the correct procedure, advantages. public officials should do so in accordance with the
colleagues are able to approach policies and purposes of the public authority for
you. Article 24 – Integrity checking which he or she works. He or she should be
answerable for acts or omissions by his or her staff
• You shall discuss doubts and 1. The public official who has which are not consistent with those policies and
questions about integrity in responsibilities for recruitment, purposes if he or she has not taken those reasonable
working relations and shall promotion or posting should ensure that steps required from a person in his or her position to
encourage colleagues to do the appropriate checks on the integrity of prevent such acts or omissions.
same. the candidate are carried out as lawfully
required.
The public official who supervises or manages other
• You are alert to risk-sensitive
public officials should take reasonable steps to
situations that workers may end up 2. If the result of any such check makes
prevent corruption by his or her staff in relation to
facing, and you shall contribute to him or her uncertain as to how to
his or her office. These steps may include
their defence in this. proceed, he or she should seek
emphasizing and enforcing rules and regulations,
appropriate advice.
providing appropriate education or training, being
• You shall address colleagues as
alert to signs of financial or other difficulties of his or
regards dubious conduct, make Article 25 – Supervisory accountability
her staff, and providing by his or her personal
agreements and, if necessary take
conduct an example of propriety and integrity.
measures. 1. The public official who supervises or
manages other public officials should do
so in accordance with the policies and
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
237

Leading program Council of Europe Model Code of Gaps
Sint Maarten Government
301
element Conduct
Code of Conduct
(P.B. 1964, no 159, chapter VIII). accordance with the law, and with those lawful
2. The public official should act in a instructions and ethical standards which relate to his
A report shall be made if there are politically neutral manner and should or her functions.
strong indications that a not attempt to frustrate the lawful
punishable act has been policies, decisions or actions of the The GoSM’s Code of Conduct does not state that
committed. public authorities. public officials should act in a politically neutral
manner and should not attempt to frustrate the
Article 6 lawful policies, decisions or actions of the public
authorities.
In the performance of his or her duties,
the public official should not act The GoSM’s Code of Conduct does not mention that,
arbitrarily to the detriment of any in the performance of his or her duties, public
person, group or body and should have officials should not act arbitrarily to the detriment of
due regard for the rights, duties and any person, group or body and should have due
proper interests of all others. regard for the rights, duties and proper interests of
all others.
Article 7
The GoSM’s Code of Conduct does not state that in
In decision-making the public official decision-making public officials should act lawfully
should act lawfully and exercise his or and exercise his or her discretionary powers
her discretionary powers impartially, impartially, taking into account only relevant
taking into account only relevant matters.
matters.
Article 17 – Protection of the public The GoSM’s Code of Conduct does not mention that
official’s privacy all necessary steps should be taken to ensure that
public officials’ privacy is appropriately respected;
All necessary steps should be taken to accordingly, declarations provided for in this Code
ensure that the public official's privacy is are to be kept confidential unless otherwise provided
appropriately respected; accordingly, for by law.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
239

Leading program Council of Europe Model Code of Gaps
Sint Maarten Government
301
element Conduct
Code of Conduct
person or body.
The GoSM’s Code of Conduct does not state that
4. The former public official should not public officials should comply with any lawful rules
use or disclose confidential information that apply to him or her regarding the acceptance of
acquired by him or her as a public appointments on leaving the public service.
official unless lawfully authorized to do
so.
The GoSM’s Code of Conduct does not include that
public officials should not give preferential treatment
5. The public official should comply with
or privileged access to the public service to former
any lawful rules that apply to him or her
public officials.
regarding the acceptance of
appointments on leaving the public
service.
Article 27 – Dealing with former public
officials
The public official should not give
preferential treatment or privileged
access to the public service to former
public officials.
Article 9
Relations with the The GoSM’s Code of Conduct does not mention that
public civil servants must conduct themselves in such a
The public official has a duty to always
manner as to ensure the public trust.
conduct himself or herself in a way that
the public's confidence and trust in the
integrity, impartiality and effectiveness
of the public service are preserved and
enhanced.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
241

Leading program Council of Europe Model Code of Gaps
Sint Maarten Government
301
element Conduct
Code of Conduct
- refuse the undue advantage; there is no - obtain witnesses if possible, such as colleagues
need to accept it for use as evidence; working nearby;
- try to identify the person who made the - prepare as soon as possible a written record of the
offer; attempt, preferably in an official notebook;
- avoid lengthy contacts, but knowing - report the attempt as soon as possible to his or her
the reason for the offer could be useful supervisor or directly to the appropriate law
in evidence; enforcement authority;
- if the gift cannot be refused or returned - continue to work normally, particularly on the
to the sender, it should be preserved, matter in relation to which the undue advantage was
but handled as little as possible; offered.
- obtain witnesses if possible, such as
colleagues working nearby;
- prepare as soon as possible a written
record of the attempt, preferably in an
official notebook;
- report the attempt as soon as possible
to his or her supervisor or directly to the
appropriate law enforcement authority;
- continue to work normally, particularly
on the matter in relation to which the
undue advantage was offered.
Article 8
Conflicts of interest Conflicts of interest are not mentioned in the Sint
Maarten Code of Conduct. Civil servants should
1. The public official should not allow his
avoid conflicts of interest between their own or their
or her private interest to conflict with his
family’s private interest and their public position;
or her public position. It is his or her
Civil servants should never take undue advantage of
responsibility to avoid such conflicts of
their position to benefit their private interest; Civil
interest, whether real, potential or
servants should disclose personal assets and
apparent.
liabilities.
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
243

Leading program Council of Europe Model Code of Gaps
Sint Maarten Government
301
element Conduct
Code of Conduct
conflict of interest;
- take steps to avoid such conflict;
- disclose to his or her supervisor any
such conflict as soon as he or she
becomes aware of it;
- comply with any final decision to
withdraw from the situation or to divest
himself or herself of the advantage
causing the conflict.
4. Whenever required to do so, the
public official should declare whether or
not he or she has a conflict of interest.
5. Any conflict of interest declared by a
candidate to the public service or to a
new post in the public service should be
resolved before appointment.
Article 14 – Declaration of interests
The public official who occupies a
position in which his or her personal or
private interests are likely to be affected
by his or her official duties should, as
lawfully required, declare upon
appointment, at regular intervals
thereafter and whenever any changes
occur the nature and extent of those
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
245

Leading program Council of Europe Model Code of Gaps
Sint Maarten Government
301
element Conduct
Code of Conduct
or her position or proper performance of
his or her duties as a public official.
Article 20 – Susceptibility to influence
by others
The public official should not allow
himself or herself to be put, or appear to
be put, in a position of obligation to
return a favor to any person or body.
Nor should his or her conduct in his or
her official capacity or in his or her
private life make him or her susceptible
to the improper influence of others.
Article 16 – Political or public activity
Political activities The GoSM’s Code of Conduct does not state that civil
Servants should not engage in activities that impair
1. Subject to respect for fundamental and
public trust in the official’s ability to be impartial.
constitutional rights, the public official
should take care that none of his or her
political activities or involvement on
political or public debates impairs the
confidence of the public and his or her
employers in his or her ability to
perform his or her duties impartially and
loyally.
2. In the exercise of his or her duties, the
public official should not allow himself
or herself to be used for partisan
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
247

Leading program Council of Europe Model Code of Gaps
Sint Maarten Government
301
element Conduct
Code of Conduct
2. The public official should take information that should properly be released and a
appropriate steps to protect the security duty not to provide information which he or she
and confidentiality of information for knows or has reasonable ground to believe is false or
which he or she is responsible or of misleading.
which he or she becomes aware.
3. The public official should not seek
access to information which it is
inappropriate for him or her to have.
The public official should not make
improper use of information which he or
she may acquire in the course of, or
arising from, his or her employment.
4. Equally the public official has a duty
not to withhold official information that
should properly be released and a duty
not to provide information which he or
she knows or has reasonable ground to
believe is false or misleading.
Use of Government property: Article 23 – Public and official resources
Use of official property No major gap identified.
and services
• It is not allowed to use In the exercise of his or her discretionary
Government property for the powers, the public official should ensure
benefit of private interests of that on the one hand the staff, and on
oneself or third parties. the other hand the public property,
facilities, services and financial
resources with which he or she is
entrusted are managed and used
Integrity Inquiry into the Functioning of the Government of Sint Maarten
249

