Scan the QR-code 
Studying in  
for online information  
and animation
the European 
Netherlands
Information for final exam pupils and  
students living in the Caribbean Netherlands.

Do you want to know what you are entitled to and 
what you need to arrange when you start studying? 
Scan the QR code or visit rijksoverheid.nl/studeren  
for a personalised overview. 
The Dutch universities of applied sciences and universities should take the situation 
of prospective students from the Caribbean part of the Kingdom into account in the 
selection process, for example by offering the possibility of remote participation in the 
selection procedures. Contact the relevant study programme about this.
Application
Apply in time
Apply as soon as possible via studielink.nl. This can be done as early as 1 October 2024.
For study programmes with selection (numerus fixus ), you must apply no later than 15 
January 2025 (before 19:00 Caribbean time). 
The application deadlines for the other study programmes with selection (e.g. art study 
programmes) can be found on the website of the university of applied sciences or uni-
versity. Pay close attention: the application deadline can be as early as 15 January 2025. 
For the remaining study programmes, it is best to apply by 1 May 2025 before 18:00  
Caribbean time. For more information go to studiekeuze123.nl/aanmelden-voor-1-mei.
Do a study choice check 
Did you apply in time through Studielink? Then you are entitled to a study choice check, 
to see if the study programme suits you. The study choice check is sometimes mandatory. 
The study choice check is usually an interview, a taster lecture with a test or a question-
naire. Afterwards, you receive feedback and a recommendation. The recommendation is 
not binding if you applied by 1 May. So even with a negative recommendation, you may 
start the study programme. However, it is then wise to think again whether the study 
programme is really the right fit for you. In fact, if you applied before 1 May, you can still 
switch study programmes.
Did you only apply to a study programme for the first time after 1 May? Then the recom -
mendation of the educational institution can be binding.

Money matters
Organise study financing 
Apply for study financing at duo.nl/cariben. In HBO and WO, you are also entitled to 
study financing if you are under 18. Apply for your student financing at least 8 weeks 
before you want to start it. Then you can be sure to get your money and student travel 
product in time. 
The student financing consists of several components, which you can apply for separately:
 • basic financing • interest-bearing loan
 • supplementary financing • tuition fee credit
 • student travel product 
For universities of applied sciences and universities, the basic financing, the supplementa -
ry financing, and the student travel product are performance-related student loans. This 
means that if you obtain your diploma within 10 years, they are converted into a gift. If 
that fails, you have to pay it all back, with interest. An interest-bearing loan and a tuition 
fee loan always have to be repaid, with interest. All conditions are available on duo.nl.
The basic financing
The level of the basic financing depends on your living situation. Will you be living 
with (one of) your parents? Then you are living at home. Are you not living with your 
parent(s)? Then you are not living at home. The basic financing is higher if you do not 
live at home. On the website of DUO, you can also find a brochure on study financing, 
specially made for students from the Caribbean part of the Kingdom. This brochure is 
also available in Papiamento and English. 
A supplementary financing
On top of the basic financing, you may be able to receive a supplementary financing. We 
recommend always applying for the supplementary financing. You only need to apply 
once. DUO then calculates your eligibility each year thereafter. The supplementary fi -
nancing depends on the income of your parents. It also takes into account the number of 
children your parents care for and whether your parents are repaying any student loans.
Tip: duo.nl/meerdanlenen has a handy overview of the  
costs of studying, how other students obtain money, and 
how much student financing you can receive. You can also  
calculate what your study will cost and how you can pay  
for it on watkoststuderen.nl and on duo.nl/rekenhulp.

Moving to the  
European Netherlands
Citizen service number
Are you applying for study financing for a study programme in the Netherlands?  
And do you have the Dutch nationality but no citizen service number (BSN) yet? Then 
you receive a BSN when you apply for student financing. With your BSN, you can already 
arrange some things in the Netherlands, even if you are not yet in the Netherlands.
DigiD: your key to the government
With your BSN, you can apply for a DigiD. DigiD is the online login tool for the govern- 
ment. You need your DigiD for your student travel product and to log in to Mijn DUO 
(My DUO), among other things. You can find more information on the application and 
activation of your DigiD from the Caribbean at www.digid.nl/buitenland.
Deregistration from population records
Before you leave for the European Netherlands, you must deregister yourself with the 
population records of the island where you live. You do this within 10 days before your 
departure, this can be done at the Civil Affairs Department or the Census Office.  
Register with the municipality where you are going to live within 5 days of arriving  
in the European Netherlands.  
For more information go to rvig.nl/Informatieblad-studenten-Caribisch-Nederland.

