 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Restricted 
ACFC/OP/III(2019)003  
 
 
 
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION  
FOR THE PROTECTION OF NATIONAL MINORITIES 
 
 
____________________________________ 
 
1
Third Opinion on the Netherlands 
Adopted on 6 March 2019 
 
 
 
  
                                              
1
 This Opinion remains subject to editorial revision until its publication. 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
 
Issues for immediate action 
 Ensure that the implementation of the 2019-2023 Administrative Agreement on the 
Frisian Language and Culture results in substantial and lasting improvements for the rights of 
persons belonging to the Frisian national minority; ensure that the province of Fryslân is 
equipped with all necessary resources to fulfill its newly assigned role as “language captain” 
for Frisian; take a strategic and participatory approach in all areas of language use with a 
specific focus on education and teacher training, on the right to use the Frisian language in 
court, and on the use of the Frisian language on TV, in print and in digital media.   
 Ensure the effective participation of Roma, Sinti and Travellers in policy making and, 
together with the stakeholders concerned, develop a comprehensive policy addressing 
discrimination against Roma, Sinti and Travellers in education, the labour market and 
housing. In particular, take resolute measures to support municipalities in implementing the 
new housing policy adopted in June 2018.  
 Promote intercultural respect and tolerance in society, inter alia through the creation 
of a sustainable, transparent and representative structure for consultation of minority 
groups and supporting civil society organisations of these groups. 
 
 
 
 
  
 3 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION FOR THE PROTECTION OF 
NATIONAL MINORITIES 
 
THIRD OPINION ON THE NETHERLANDS 
 
1. The Advisory Committee adopted the present Opinion on the Netherlands in 
accordance with Article 26 (1) of the Framework Convention and Rule 23 of Resolution (97) 10 
of the Committee of Ministers. The findings are based on information contained in the State 
Report (hereinafter the State Report), received on 11 July 2018, other written sources and on 
information obtained by the Advisory Committee from governmental and non-governmental 
contacts during its visit to Leeuwarden/Ljouwert, Eindhoven, Gerwen/Nuenen and The Hague 
from 19 to 22 November 2018.    
2. Section I below contains the Advisory Committee’s main findings on key issues 
pertaining to the implementation of the Framework Convention in the Netherlands. These 
findings reflect the more detailed article-by-article findings contained in Section II, which 
covers those provisions of the Framework Convention on which the Advisory Committee has 
substantive issues to raise.  
3. Both sections make extensive reference to the follow-up given to the findings of the 
monitoring of the Framework Convention, contained in the Advisory Committee’s first and 
second Opinions on the Netherlands, adopted on 25 June 2009 and 20 June 2013 respectively, 
and in the Committee of Ministers’ corresponding Resolutions, adopted on 12 January 2011 
and 28 May 2014.  
4. The concluding remarks, contained in Section III, could serve as the basis for the 
Committee of Ministers’ forthcoming conclusions and recommendations on the Netherlands. 
5. The Advisory Committee looks forward to continuing its dialogue with the Dutch 
authorities as well as with representatives of national minorities and others involved in the 
implementation of the Framework Convention. In order to promote an inclusive and 
transparent process, the Advisory Committee strongly encourages the authorities to make the 
2
present Opinion public upon its receipt. It also invites the authorities to translate the present 
Opinion and the forthcoming Committee of Ministers’ Resolution into Dutch and Frisian, and to 
disseminate it widely among all relevant actors. The Advisory Committee encourages the 
authorities to hold a follow-up event after the publication of this third cycle Opinion. It 
considers that a follow-up dialogue to review the observations made in this Opinion would be 
beneficial for further implementation of the recommendations. 
  
                                              
2
 On 16 April 2009, the Committee of Ministers amended the rules for the publication of the Advisory Committee’s 
Opinion and other monitoring documents, aiming at increasing transparency and at sharing the information on the 
monitoring findings and conclusions with all the parties involved at an early stage (see Resolution CM/Res(2009)3 
amending Resolution (97) 10). 
 5 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
Protection against discrimination 
12. The General Equal Treatment Act of 2004 covers discrimination on grounds of “race”, 
which according to the interpretation by Dutch equality bodies is understood as also covering 
language, including the Frisian language. However, for reasons of clarity and accessibility of the 
law for persons belonging to national minorities as well as its visibility and preventive function, 
the Advisory Committee considers that explicitly including the ground of language in the law 
would be important.  
Promoting integration and intercultural dialogue 
13. The Dutch authorities undertake a broad set of measures to promote tolerance and 
intercultural dialogue, combat discrimination, and address hate speech and hate crime. 
However, the trend questioning the image of the Netherlands as traditionally open and 
tolerant towards ethnic and religious diversity has continued during the monitoring period. 
Divisive and xenophobic discourse is widespread not only by far-right parties, but also by some 
mainstream politicians.  
14. The Advisory Committee was informed by the representatives of minority groups that 
they would like to make a more active contribution to the integration of Dutch society from 
their respective minority perspective, but lack funding for their organisations and functioning 
channels for participation in the decision-making processes.    
15. While the authorities recognise that Roma, Sinti and Travellers are subject to 
discrimination in a variety of areas and therefore support a number of programmes, neither a 
comprehensive policy nor a functioning consultative mechanism targeted at these 
communities exists. In particular, the housing situation of persons living in campsites (the so-
called woonwagenbewoners) raises concerns. While the central government adopted a new 
policy framework in June 2018 aimed at approaching the issue from a human rights 
perspective, it appears that municipalities require support in actually implementing this policy 
at local level.  
Frisian language media 
16. The existence of the regional broadcaster Omrop Fryslân, the independence of which 
was in question in the context of a reform of the Dutch broadcasting system between 2013 and 
2016, is of considerable importance for the promotion of the Frisian language. The fact that 
support to the broadcaster is secured through the 2019-2023 administrative agreement for 
another five years is to be welcomed, but its position remains vulnerable as the provision of 
public broadcasting in the Frisian language is not safeguarded in the Dutch Media Act or in the 
Use of Frisian Act.  
Use of the Frisian language 
17. The Use of Frisian Act, which entered into force in 2014, designated Dutch and Frisian 
as the official languages in the Province of Fryslân and codified relatively wide-ranging 
language rights for Frisian speakers in public administration and courts, albeit mostly applicable 
only on the territory of the Province of Fryslân. While the implementation of the Use of Frisian 
Act appears to be mostly satisfactory for dealings with the administration at provincial level, 
 7 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
II. ARTICLE-BY-ARTICLE FINDINGS 
Article 3 of the Framework Convention  
Scope of application 
Recommendations from the two previous cycles of monitoring 
21. In the previous monitoring cycles, the Advisory Committee found that the approach 
taken by the authorities with regard to the personal scope of application of the Framework 
Convention and notably the citizenship criterion and the territoriality principle could limit 
arbitrarily the possibility for other potential groups to benefit from the provisions of the 
Framework Convention. The Advisory Committee considered that those groups had not been 
adequately consulted on their possible inclusion and urged the authorities to adopt a more 
flexible approach towards the scope of application of the Framework Convention, including 
through consultation mechanisms. 
Present situation 
22. The position of the authorities regarding the limitation of the scope of application to 
the Frisians remains unchanged, which is regrettable. Most rights granted to the Frisian 
minority, in particular those related to the use of and learning of the language (see Articles 10 
to 14), are limited in territorial scope, namely to the Province of Fryslân.  
23. According to the authorities, no formal requests for recognition as a national minority 
or for protection under the Framework Convention were made to the government or the 
Parliament during the reporting period. The authorities confirmed during the visit of the 
Advisory Committee that if such a request was submitted, it would be evaluated according to 
the five criteria laid down in the Parliamentary debate upon the ratification of the Framework 
4
Convention.  
24. During and after its monitoring visit, the Advisory Committee established contact with 
5
some representatives of groups identifying as Roma, Sinti or Travellers. They showed an active 
interest in the Framework Convention and expressed regret that the authorities do not 
consider them as falling under its scope of application. One of the reasons that no formal 
request for recognition has been made, the Advisory Committee was informed, is because of 
the restrictiveness of the above-mentioned five requirements disqualifying such a claim. 
25. Therefore, the Advisory Committee strongly reiterates its view expressed in its first 
6
Opinion on the Netherlands that the requirement for a national minority to live in 
                                              
4
 Protocol of the Parliamentary debate of 30 November 2004 on the ratification of the FCNM, EK 2004/2004, nr. 7, 
338-348. According to the First State Report of the Netherlands (para. 3.3), “national minorities are those groups of 
citizens who are traditionally resident within the territory of the State and who live in their traditional/ancestral 
settlement areas, but who differ from the majority population through their own language, culture and history – i.e. 
have an identity of their own – and who wish to preserve that identity”. 
5
 The overall number of persons belonging to these groups is estimated to lie between 32 000 and 48 000. See  
Council of Europe (July 2012), Estimates and official updates of Roma in Europe. 
6
  See the Advisory Committee’s first Opinion on the Netherlands, adopted on 25 June 2009, for a detailed 
assessment of the territorial dimension of this definition (para. 22) and the citizenship criterion (para 23). 
 9 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
13
for Human Rights as well as the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights have 
criticised the limited applicability of international human rights treaties to the Dutch overseas 
territories.  
Recommendations  
30. The Advisory Committee urges the authorities to adopt a more flexible approach 
towards the scope of application of the Framework Convention. It invites the authorities to 
extend its scope of application on an article-by-article basis to the groups who could benefit 
from its provisions. It further calls on the authorities to enter into a formal dialogue with 
representatives of groups interested in the protection provided by the Framework Convention.  
31. The Advisory Committee calls on the authorities to clarify the legal situation 
regarding the territorial scope of application of the Framework Convention following the 2010 
constitutional reform.  
Article 4 of the Framework Convention 
Protection against discrimination 
Recommendations from the two previous cycles of monitoring 
32. In previous monitoring cycles, the Advisory Committee noted the comprehensive 
approach to combatting discrimination in the Netherlands and welcomed the development of a 
system of Local Anti-Discrimination Bureaus. It noted, however, that only few cases of 
discrimination were brought to the Ombudsperson and the former Equal Treatment 
Commission by persons belonging to minority groups and called on the authorities to raise 
awareness of the remedies available among all ethnic groups.  
14
Present situation 
33. The right to equality and non-discrimination is mainly guaranteed by the Dutch 
constitution (Article 1) and the General Equal Treatment Act of 2004 (Algemene Wet Gelijke 
15
Behandeling, AWGB). The latter prohibits direct and indirect discrimination and applies to the 
private sector, the provision of goods and services including education, to social protection and 
to health care. For all forms of discrimination, a reversed burden of proof is applied in 
procedures before the courts as well by the Equality body, the National Institute for Human 
Rights.   
34. The constitution contains an open ended list of discrimination grounds. The AWGB, 
however, applies only to the grounds listed in its Article 1.1.b. These include nationality and 
race, but not language. The Advisory Committee takes note that “race” has been considered by 
                                              
13
 National Institute for Human Rights (2016), Naar een mensenrechtelijk aanvaardbaar voorzieningenniveau voor 
Bonaire, Sint Eustatius en Saba (Towards an acceptable level of human rights provision in Bonaire, Sint Eustatius 
and Saba); UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (6 July 2017), Concluding observations on the 
sixth periodic report of the Netherlands, para. 14.  
14
 The Advisory Committee notes that the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) has in 
2018 had occasion to examine this development in depth while drawing up its fifth report on the Netherlands. The 
Advisory Committee refers to ECRI’s detailed findings and recommendations in this regard. 
15
 European network of legal experts on gender equality and non-discrimination (2018), Country report Non-
Discrimination; The Netherlands.  
 11 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
38. The office of the National Ombudsman of the Netherlands (in the following “the 
Ombudsperson”) investigates complaints regarding the public administration, can launch 
investigations on its own initiative, and provides advice to the public service on how to improve 
its conduct. The Ombudsperson’s decisions are not binding, but its decisions have much 
authority and are thus followed in about 95% of the cases. The Ombudsperson has 170 staff, 
which include Frisian speakers, and can receive complaints in the Frisian language. There have 
been no such requests during the reporting period.  
39. The Advisory Committee notes that since 2016 single national reports are being 
produced compiling all incidents of discrimination registered by the Dutch police and Local 
Anti-Discrimination Bureaus. In 2017, the police registered 3 499 discrimination cases, the 
ADVs 4 691, and the NIHR received 416 requests for an opinion and 4 259 questions. Ethnic 
origin remained the most frequent grounds for discrimination; the police registered 41% of all 
cases on these grounds, of which 8% related to anti-Semitism and 5% to Islamophobia. In 2017, 
the Prosecution dealt with 144 specific discrimination offences; 71% of the indicted cases led 
to a criminal sentence. Under general criminal law, another 187 discriminatory offenses were 
20
registered. Due to Dutch data protection regulations, no disaggregated data about the ethnic 
affiliation of the complainants is available. The Second European Union Minorities and 
Discrimination Survey (MIDIS II survey) of 2017 indicates a certain degree of underreporting of 
21
discrimination. This resonates with the impression gained by the Advisory Committee during 
its visit that those most at risk of discrimination are not necessarily aware of the possibilities to 
file complaints. 
40. Personal data recorded in the population registers does not contain information 
about ethnic affiliation and there is no census carried out in the Netherlands. Information is 
merely recorded about the country of birth and hence only if a person is of Dutch or “migration 
22
background”. The Advisory Committee understands the authorities’ reluctance concerning 
the collection of personal data deemed to belong to the private sphere, such as on ethnic 
affiliation. However, it recalls that obtaining reliable information on the situation of persons 
belonging to national minorities is relevant to the implementation of the Framework 
Convention. This information can be obtained by collecting statistical data or by other means, 
such as ad hoc studies, surveys or opinion polls. The authorities could make more use of such 
data while at the same time complying with existing standards for the protection of personal 
data. Those data are relevant for the understanding of the cultural diversity of the population, 
the position of national minorities in society as well as the development and monitoring of 
evidence-based anti-discrimination policies.  
Recommendations  
41. The Advisory Committee calls on the authorities to explicitly incorporate the ground of 
“language” into the General Equal Treatment Act in order to increase clarity, accessibility and 
visibility of the provisions in place, including with respect to Frisian speakers. 
                                              
20
 Public Prosecution (April 2018), Strafbare Discriminatie in Beeld 2017, p. 42. 
21
 EU Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA) (2017), Second European Union Minorities and Discrimination Survey, 
pages 31-51.  
22
 For population data see the website of Statistics Netherlands. 
 13 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
47. The main improvements in the new agreement as compared to the previous one are 
the secured co-financing of the Chair of the Frisian Language at the University of Groningen, 
financial support to the Province of Fryslân for its additional tasks in the education area, and a 
clear description of the role of the school inspectorate (see Article 14). The new agreement 
also contains explicit input, output and outcome indicators and clearly assigns roles and 
responsibilities.  
48. The Advisory Committee is pleased to note that the new administrative agreement lists 
a number of projects following up to Leeuwarden/Ljouwert’s programme as European Capital 
of Culture in 2018. For example, parties express their commitment to establish a “production 
house for language” to stimulate the production of poetry and prose in the Frisian language 
and the “Land of Languages” visitor centre will continue to exist as for the duration of the 
agreement. Overall, the programme of Leeuwarden/Ljouwert as a European Capital of Culture 
25
contained many activities in the Frisian language, even though some interlocutors 
complained that this did not lead to sufficient visibility of the Frisian language in 
Leeuwarden/Ljouwert’s public spaces.  
49. The prominent Frisian cultural institutions are co-funded by the provincial authorities 
and the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science. These are the Frisian language theatre 
company Tryater, the research institute Fryske Akademy, and the Frisian Literature Museum 
and Documentation Centre Tresoar. The latter is the result of a merger of the provincial 
archives and library and is currently digitising the entire corpus of Frisian literature (approx. 
20 000 titles). The Advisory Committee welcomes the fact that the administrative agreements 
prescribe mutual consultations between the province and the government in case one of the 
two sides wishes to lower the resources allocated to these institutions. Other cultural 
institutions, such as the Centre for Frisian Art and Culture Keunstwurk and the language 
promotion institution Afûk are supported by the province only.  
50. The Province of Fryslân supports a variety of innovative projects promoting the Frisian 
culture and language such as the smartphone application and booklet Taal fan it hert 
(“Language of your Heart”) featuring information about Frisian culture and language, the 
“Frisian Google Translate Week” mobilising hundreds of volunteers and resulting in the 
inclusion of Frisian in Google Translate, and the biennial Frisian-language song festival for 
young people SjONG, which includes a prize for the best YouTube video.  
Recommendation 
51. The Advisory Committee encourages the authorities to continue providing stable 
support to institutions and projects which protect and promote Frisian culture in consultation 
with the provincial authorities, municipalities, and civil society organisations.  
  
                                              
25
 See for example the activities under the programme Lân fan taal (Country of language), available at 
https://lanfantaal.frl/.  
 15 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
among persons with Turkish and Moroccan backgrounds has shown that younger Muslims in 
particular feel that they are judged more negatively than others and that they are seen as 
33
members of an ethnic and religious group first and citizens of the Netherlands second.  
56. In a recent Eurobarometer survey, 55% of respondents considered that anti-Semitism 
has increased over the past five years and 77% thought that conflicts in the Middle East have 
34
an influence on the way Dutch Jewish people are perceived in the Netherlands. Annually 
between 2015 and 2017, between 330 and 430 incidents of hate speech and hate crime of an 
35
anti-Semitic nature were reported to the police. Interlocutors of the Jewish community 
informed the Advisory Committee that the security of synagogues and other institutions and 
the related costs are a major concern for them.  
57. The Advisory Committee observes that the current generic approach to integration 
policy places the responsibility for integration mainly on persons belonging to minority groups. 
In this context, it wishes to remind the authorities that in the spirit of Article 6 of the 
Framework Convention, genuine integration of society is a two-way process encompassing all 
36
segments of society, majorities and minorities alike. 
58. The Advisory Committee is particularly worried that the National Consultation 
Platform for Minorities (Landelijk Overleg Minderheden, LOM), which discontinued its activity 
37
in 2013, has not yet been replaced by another consultation mechanism. In the context of the 
new generic integration policy, the government decided in 2012 to dissolve this platform as its 
representation based on ethnic affiliation was considered to over-emphasise ethnic dividing 
lines in society and ignore other aspects of internal diversity of the migrant population such as 
38
educational background, generational differences or cultural orientations.   
59. According to the authorities, LOM was replaced by a model of flexible dialogue that 
enables the government to involve various groups and individuals on the basis of current 
events and topical issues. The Advisory Committee was informed of a number of examples 
where the government held consultations with representatives of minority groups on specific 
topics, such as with Turkish youth on social inclusion, or with Roma, Sinti and Travellers on the 
housing policy.  
                                                                                                                                                 
partial ban on wearing face coverings in education buildings, public buildings, public transport and care), Memorie 
van Toelichting (Explanatory Memorandum).  
33
 The Netherlands Institute of Social Research (2016), Integration in sight? A review of eight domains of integration 
of migrants in the Netherlands, Summary, p. 20.  
34
 European Commission (December 2018), Special Eurobarometer 484, Perceptions of anti-Semitism.  
35
 ODIHR Hate Crime Report Netherlands. The police figures include hate speech incidents, data reported by local 
anti-discrimination services, and online hate speech incidents. Hate crimes recorded by the police can only be 
disaggregated by either bias motive or type of crime, but not simultaneously by both. 
36
 ACFC Thematic Commentary No. 4, The Framework Convention: a key tool to managing diversity through minority 
rights. The scope of application of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities, adopted on 27 
May 2016, para. 54.  
37
 The National Consultation Platform for Minorities, established in 1997, had brought together representatives of the 
larger minority communities such as people with Caribbean, Surinamese, Moluccan, Turkish, Moroccan and Tunisian 
backgrounds as well as associations representing refugee communities to advise and inform the government on 
integration policies. 
38
 Vandebunt Adviseurs (2016), Evaluatie Landelijk overleg minderhedenbeleid (Evaluation of the National 
Consultation Platform for Minorities), p. 11.  
 17 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
65. As far as prosecution is concerned, there is a specialised unit for the prosecution of 
punishable hate speech and hate crime and there have been several landmark cases, including 
43
against prominent politicians. Hate speech is particularly widespread on social media and 
websites. Since the establishment of the Hotline for Discrimination on the Internet (MiND) in 
2013, the number of complaints it received increased steadily. In 2017, it received 1 367 
complaints, which is a 49% increase compared to the year before. As regards hate-motivated 
violence, 603 cases were reported to the police in 2017, about half of them on grounds of 
44
ethnic origin. NGO reports and qualitative studies show, however, that most incidents never 
get reported as persons belonging to minority groups in particular are either not aware of 
45
bodies they could report to, or do not believe that reporting would make a difference. 
Recommendation 
66. The Advisory Committee encourages the authorities to continue effectively preventing, 
investigating, prosecuting and sanctioning hate speech and hate crime through adequate 
legislation and sufficiently resourced institutions and to raise the awareness of persons 
belonging to minority groups of the possibilities of reporting.  
Roma, Sinti and Travellers 
Recommendations from the two previous cycles of monitoring 
67. The Advisory Committee recommended that the authorities improve their dialogue 
with Roma, Sinti and Traveller communities, including through the use of mediators, to address 
the issue of statelessness and to ensure access to education with specific attention to 
education for girls.  
Present situation 
68. Estimates of Roma, Sinti and Traveller populations in the Netherlands vary a lot. 
46
Dutch Travellers (woonwagenbewoners) are considered to be the largest subgroup. Limited 
data is available on the situation of these groups as well as on instances of discrimination and 
anti-Gypsyist attitudes in society.  
69. The Netherlands does not have a national Roma integration strategy, or another 
specific policy towards this minority group. The above-mentioned 2016 National Anti-
Discrimination Action Programme does not refer specifically to discrimination against Roma, 
47
Sinti and Travellers. In its response to the 2011 European Commission Communication on an 
EU Framework for National Roma Integration Strategies up to 2020, the government mentions 
its 2011 generic policy on integration, social cohesion and citizenship, which applies to all 
groups of a particular ethnic and/or cultural origin, including Roma, and stresses that 
“integration is not the responsibility of the government, but rather of those who settle in the 
                                              
43
 See for example the prosecution of the leader of the Party for Freedom (PVV) for islamophobic comments. 
Prosecution (2018), Strafbare Discriminatie in Beeld 2017. 
44
 MIKR, Police and Art.1 (2018), Discriminatiecijfers in 2017 (Discrimination figures 2017).  
45
 See for example Ineke van der Valk (2018), Islamophobia in the Netherlands, National Report 2017, in: Enes 
Bayraklı, Farid Hafez, European Islamophobia Report 2018, Istanbul, SETA.  
46
 ETHOS (2018), Country report on the current and historical minoritisation of Roma minorities in the Netherlands, 
by Jing Hiah and Trudie Knijn.  
47
 Government of the Netherlands, Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations (22 January 2016), National Anti-
Discrimination Action Programme. 
 19 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
broad scope and that Roma and Sinti representatives are involved in the decisions about the 
allocation of funding. Bearing in mind the discussions in the community about whether the 
target group of the funding should be extended beyond “pre-war” Roma and Sinti, the Advisory 
Committee considers it important that the authorities maintain a constant dialogue with the 
community to ensure the legitimacy of the fund’s work.  
73. Another measure that deserves positive mention is the travelling exhibition “O Lungo 
Drom” (the long road), which is a project carried out by a Sinti organisation and features 
information on the history and presence of Roma and Sinti in the Netherlands. It is shown at 
about five different places in the Netherlands each year. In 2018, the exhibition was shown in 
Arnhem, Middelburg, Heerlen, Eindhoven, and Weert. In 2019, the exhibition will be linked to 
the national commemoration of the deportation of Roma to the Auschwitz Concentration 
51
Camp on 19 May 1944 and complemented with an English version so it can be shown abroad.      
74. The educational position of Roma, Sinti and Travellers in the Netherlands can be 
52
described as below average. While participation in primary education is assessed as relatively 
good and there is little evidence of early school leaving, the situation is more problematic from 
secondary education onwards. Children belonging to the Roma, Sinti and Traveller 
communities indicate that they often experience discrimination in the field of education. This 
would result in referrals from primary education to too low levels in secondary education and 
53
the inability to find traineeships. 
75. The housing situation is, as also acknowledged by the authorities during the visit, 
extremely complex. Whereas many Sinti and – by definition – the Travellers – have the desire 
to live in a caravan on (permanent) campsites, most Roma, and in particular those who arrived 
more recently, live in social housing or in privately rented apartments at the bottom of the 
54
housing market. A survey conducted by the government in 2018 found that there are 260 
campsites with a total of 7 723 pitches spread across more than 80% of the Dutch 
55
municipalities. Given that the average size of a Roma, Sinti or Traveller household is 
56
estimated to be three persons, it can be assumed that over 23 000 persons live on such sites. 
The above-mentioned survey also found that 38% of the sites are owned by municipalities and 
47% by housing corporations.  
57
76. In 2018, a new housing policy framework was developed by the government in 
consultation with Roma, Sinti and Traveller representatives as well as the Association of Dutch 
Municipalities (VNG). This new framework replaces the one in operation since 2006, which had 
provided municipalities with five options relating to the maintenance of mobile home pitches. 
Two of these, the zero-option (also called “extinction policy”) and the reduction-option (“roll-
                                              
51
 European Heritage Stories Grant, Directorate Democratisation, Council of Europe Strasbourg, 17 October 2018. 
52
 Unless otherwise noted, the information in this paragraph is based on Risbo (2017), Monitor Sociale Inclusie: 
meting 3 (Social Inclusion Monitor 3), English summary, p. 53. 
53
 Risbo (2017), Monitor Sociale Inclusie: meting 3 (Social Inclusion Monitor 3), p. 53. 
54
 Dutch Knowledge Centre on Discrimination Art.1 (2012), Social Thematic Study: The situation of Roma, pp. 8-9.    
55 55
  The Netherlands, Minister of Interior and Kingdom Relations (2018), Letter to House of Representatives, 
Aanbieding Monitor Woonwagenstandplaatsen in Nederland (Monitor caravan pitches in the Netherlands), 12 
October 2018. 
56
 FRANET Information Request on Roma and Travellers for EU MIDIS II (2017), p. 13-14.  
57
 Ministry of Interior and Kingdom Relations (12 July 2018), Beleidskader gemeentelijk woonwagen - en 
standplaatsenbeleid (Policy framework for a municipal policy on mobile homes and pitches).  
 21 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
82. The Advisory Committee calls on the authorities to consider adopting a more evidence-
based, comprehensive and strategic approach towards the persistent discrimination and 
inequality experienced by persons belonging to the Roma, Sinti and Traveller communities 
especially in the areas of education, housing and employment.  
Article 9 of the Framework Convention 
Media in the Frisian language 
Recommendations from the two previous cycles of monitoring 
83. The Advisory Committee stressed the importance of Omrop Fryslân as the only Frisian-
language TV and radio broadcaster and called on the authorities to maintain its independence 
and financial security as well as to base any legislative changes concerning regional 
broadcasting on the recommendations of the Hoekstra Committee and consultations with 
representatives of the Frisian minority. 
Present situation 
84. In the context of a reform of the Dutch regional broadcasting system and considerable 
cuts in central government funding, a draft law to amend the 2008 Media Act was discussed in 
the period between 2013 and 2016. The draft law foresaw the merger of regional broadcasters 
and their integration into the national broadcasting station, thus curtailing the independence 
of the Frisian language broadcaster Omrop Fryslân. Following a political debate about the 
specific responsibility of Omrop Fryslân in preserving and promoting the Frisian language, the 
draft law was ultimately not adopted. Instead, the independence of Omrop Fryslân was 
secured through a separate Administrative Agreement on the Frisian Media between the 
central government and the Province of Fryslân concluded in 2016, which guaranteed the 
independence of Omrop Fryslân and joint financing by the government and the province until 
2018. From 2019, the provisions on Omrop Fryslân are incorporated into the Administrative 
Agreement on the Frisian Language and Culture 2019-2023. Through the new agreement, the 
existence of Omrop Fryslân as an independent regional broadcaster is guaranteed for another 
5-year period.  
85. The Advisory Committee considers the existence of a well-equipped public broadcaster 
62
in the Frisian language to be one of the cornerstones guaranteeing Frisian language rights. It 
therefore welcomes that the Dutch authorities have secured the existence of Omrop Fryslân as 
an independent entity until 2023. This notwithstanding, the Advisory Committee considers the 
position of Omrop Fryslân is vulnerable. The provision of radio and television in the Frisian 
language is safeguarded neither in the Media Act nor in the Use of Frisian Act.  
86. In the context of the reform of regional public broadcasting, all regional broadcasters, 
including Omrop Fryslân experienced considerable cuts of their budgetary provisions from the 
central government. The Advisory Committee is aware that the cuts turned out less severe 
than initially foreseen, but still regrets that Omrop Fryslân had to make considerable savings. 
                                              
62
 See ACFC Thematic Commentary No. 3, Language rights of persons belonging to national minorities under the 
Framework Convention, adopted on 24 May 2012, para. 41. See also Committee of Ministers Resolution 
CM/Rec(2012)1 on public service media governance. 
 23 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
newspapers do not receive public funding that might provide incentives to use the Frisian 
language more, nor for the language courses.  
92. During the visit, the Advisory Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that after 
the merger of municipalities, several small local newspapers, some of which write in minority 
65
languages, now compete for the same funding stream available for such newspapers. The 
Advisory Committee finds it important that solutions will be found for these newspapers, 
which, despite the widespread digitalisation, still constitute an important source of information 
and identification for people in particular in rural areas.  
93. Frisian is a popular language on social media. Experts even argue that the use of written 
Frisian has become more widespread through social media because Frisian speakers may use it 
66
to communicate in an informal way with their friends and family. Even though on social 
media Frisian is reportedly not always used in the orthographically correct way, the Advisory 
Committee considers that the increasing use of Frisian is a sign of the vitality of that language.  
94. Frisian is the language of the home page of the website of Omrop Fryslân and the 
entire Omrop Fryslân App is in Frisian. Only the news section of the website and the App are 
also available in Dutch. 75% of news articles are read in Frisian, and 25% in Dutch. The Advisory 
Committee is pleased to note that Omrop Fryslân managed to double the number of visitors on 
its websites between 2014 and 2018 and has a Frisian-only Facebook page reaching between 
80 000 and 120 000 unique visitors per day. Furthermore, data from Omrop Fryslân show that 
this is not limited to the younger generation; 27% of users of www.omropFryslân.nl are 
67
between 60 and 75 years old. The Advisory Committee welcomes these developments and 
considers that social media could be a valuable opportunity to promote the use of the written 
Frisian language.   
Recommendations  
95. The Advisory Committee strongly encourages the authorities to continue their support 
for sustainable functioning of the only Frisian language broadcaster in the country and to 
ensure its availability throughout the entire country.  
96. The Advisory Committee calls on the authorities to develop a coherent strategy for 
Frisian language media, making use of new technological developments and the possibilities 
opened up by social media; to consider investing in the creation of high-quality and relevant 
content in the Frisian language targeted at a broad range of Frisian speakers of all ages, which 
can be used by different types of online and print media.  
  
                                              
65
 Frisian, but also in Bildt such as the 'Bildtse Post', which is the example in question. 
66
 Province of Fryslân (2018), Taal fan it hert (Language of the heart). 
67
 18-30 years: 21%, 31-44 years: 22%, 45-59 years: 30%. Information provided by Omrop Fryslân.   
 25 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
may result in disadvantages for the Frisian-speaking persons concerned as the translation may 
affect the authenticity of the declarations. 
102. The Advisory Committee welcomes the resolution entailed in paragraph Chapter 1 of 
the 2019-2023 Administrative Agreement on the Frisian Language and Culture that the 
Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations “will focus on increasing the minimum 
knowledge of the Frisian language and culture of the civil servants directly involved in the 
69
Frisian language and culture dossier”. 
103. At provincial level, interlocutors reported good possibilities of using Frisian orally and in 
writing. The Advisory Committee noted a positive attitude towards the promotion of the 
Frisian language at political level as well as among the staff responsible for the file. The website 
of the Province is available in both languages, most staff speak the language, and documents 
concerning Frisian issues in the wider sense exist in the two languages, sometimes only in 
Frisian.  
104. The province also supports numerous projects to facilitate the use of the Frisian 
language in all spheres of life, including for official purposes. One such tool is the Taalweb Frysk 
(Frisian Language Web), a digital platform developed by the Fryske Akademy containing a 
glossary, spellchecking, and plug-ins for the Frisian language for common computer software 
70
applications such as Word and Outlook. 
105. The Advisory Committee was informed that at municipal level 96% of civil servants 
71
understand Frisian, 75% speak it, and 24% have a written command of the Frisian language. 
Recommendation 
106. The Advisory Committee calls on the authorities to ensure that the right to use the 
Frisian language in contacts with the administration, as guaranteed by the Use of Frisian Act, is 
fully implemented in practice in all public services, including in law enforcement.  
 
Use of Frisian in courts 
Recommendations from the two previous cycles of monitoring 
107. The Advisory Committee noted that the right to speak Frisian in courts is guaranteed 
by law, but regretted the lack of Frisian-speaking interpreters and recommended the 
authorities to be more proactive in this respect.            
Present situation 
108. Accused parties and witnesses have long had the right to speak Frisian at court 
hearings and trials in the Province of Fryslân, and this right was confirmed by the 2014 Use of 
Frisian Act. Frisian may also be spoken at hearings and trials outside the Province of Fryslân 
                                              
69
 Administrative Agreement on the Frisian Language and Culture, Chapter 1, para. 1.7. 
70
 See https://taalweb.frl.  
71
 Written information submitted by the authorities.  
 27 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
Article 11 of the Framework Convention 
Minority language signs and topographical indications 
Recommendations from the two previous cycles of monitoring 
114. In the previous monitoring cycles, the Advisory Committee observed that the display of 
signs in the Frisian language is within the remit of municipalities and that the situation varies 
from one municipality to another. It recommended the authorities to step up their efforts 
promoting the possibility to display bilingual topographical indications throughout the Province 
of Fryslân.  
Present situation 
115.   Municipalities in the Province of Fryslân determine themselves whether names of 
the municipality, streets, and other topographical areas are indicated in Dutch, Frisian or 
bilingually, and these records are automatically aligned with the land registry and cadastral 
74
system at national level. 
116. The Province of Fryslân recently posted an alphabetical list of all place names in the 
75
Frisian language on its website, a move which is to be welcomed. In the capital of the 
province, Leeuwarden/Ljouwert, as well as in Sneek/Snits, the administrative centre of the 
newly merged municipality Súdwest-Fryslân, the Frisian language was however not very visible 
in public spaces during the visit of the Advisory Committee. Some interlocutors shared their 
view that putting up place names in the Frisian language would sometimes trigger opposition 
by parts of the population. The Advisory Committee hopes that more merged municipalities 
will follow the example of the municipality of Súdwest-Fryslân, where bilingual signposting is 
planned to be used throughout the new administrative centre. The Advisory Committee recalls 
the important symbolic value of bilingual topographical indications as affirmation that the 
presence of linguistic diversity is appreciated and that a given territory is shared in harmony by 
76
various linguistic groups.  
117. Finally, the Advisory Committee takes note that the interlocutors from Frisian NGOs 
said that Frisian language inscriptions on courts or police buildings in the Province of Fryslân 
would send a strong signal that the Frisian language has an official status in the Province.  
Recommendation 
118. The Advisory Committee encourages the authorities to increase their efforts in 
promoting the display of signs and topographical indications in the Frisian language.   
                                              
74
 Administrative Agreement on the Frisian Language and Culture, Chapter 3.2.  
75
 Alphabetical list of place names in Dutch and Frisian, available on the website of the Province of Fryslân.  
76
 ACFC Thematic Commentary No. 3, The Language Rights of Persons belonging to National Minorities under the 
Framework Convention, adopted on 24 May 2012, para. 67. 
 29 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
123. The Advisory Committee follows with interest a certain paradigm change from 
protecting and promoting the Frisian language as such to a multilingual approach placing the 
Frisian language alongside Dutch and other languages. The trilingual schools in the Province of 
Fryslân are one example of this trend and another is the conversion of the study courses on 
Frisian language and culture at the University of Groningen into courses on multilingualism and 
83
minority languages. During its visit, the Advisory Committee learned with interest that placing 
the Frisian language in a multilingual framework is considered to generally have positive 
effects. For example, some of the experts that the Advisory Committee met during the visit 
highlighted that trilingual schools would also attract children from Dutch-only families. There is 
also research about positive effects of trilingual schooling on language acquisition of children 
with a migrant background, who feel more at ease in an environment where multilingualism is 
appreciated. The Advisory Committee observes the multilingual approach taken in the Province 
of Fryslân, which in its view, apart from having significant cognitive benefits for the individuals, 
can contribute to intercultural comprehension and co-operation. However, the Advisory 
Committee understands the concerns that an overemphasis on multilingualism may overlook 
the value of protecting and promoting the Frisian language in its own right. 
Recommendation 
124. The Advisory Committee invites the authorities to continue to comprehensively assess 
the effects on Frisian language learning in the framework of the multilingual approach.  
125. The Advisory Committee encourages the authorities to support the mainstreaming of 
Frisian history and culture in the general curricula, including outside of the province. 
Article 14 of the Framework Convention 
Teaching in and of the Frisian language 
Recommendations from the two previous cycles of monitoring 
126. In the past monitoring cycles, the Advisory Committee recommended that the 
authorities continue their efforts to provide high quality education in Frisian at all levels, 
including by developing evaluation tools, and to safeguard the existence of small trilingual 
schools in rural areas. The Advisory Committee further invited the authorities to ensure that 
the interests of minority representatives, including parents, are taken into account with regard 
to the adequate amount of teaching of the Frisian language. 
Present situation 
127. According to the Dutch Primary Education Act and the Secondary Education Act, 
teaching of the Frisian language is compulsory in the Province of Fryslân, unless schools have 
been granted exemption by the Provincial Executive. Until 2014, the core objectives (i.e. 
attainment targets) for the Frisian language, as for all subjects, were established by the 
Ministry of Education, Culture and Science. With effect as of August 2014, this responsibility 
has been decentralised to the Province of Fryslân through amendments to the Dutch Primary 
Education Act, the Secondary Education Act and the Centres of Expertise Act. By granting more 
                                              
83
 See website of the bachelor degree Minorities and Multilingualism at the University of Groningen. 
 31 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
133. The Advisory Committee was informed that both policy makers and practitioners in 
the Province of Fryslân were very satisfied with the decentralisation of competencies. The 
Advisory Committee got the impression that this decision served to energise stakeholders at 
provincial level and motivates a multitude of stakeholders to work together in achieving the 
common goal of promoting the Frisian language.  
134. As far as the effect on the amount and quality of Frisian language teaching and 
learning is concerned, it is too early to draw conclusions. As the Frisian Language Plan is the 
first assessment of this scale and level of detail, it is difficult to trace developments over the 
past five years. Also, the absolute number of schools has decreased during the reporting 
period, which makes it difficult to draw comparisons over time. Given the thorough 
methodology of the study, however, it will certainly provide a useful baseline for tracing 
progress in the future.  
135. It is evident, though, that the number of trilingual (Dutch/English/Frisian) schools has 
89
increased. While 53 trilingual schools are reported for 2012, the Network of Trilingual Schools 
90
counted 85 members in January 2019. In the Administrative Agreement on the Frisian 
Language and Culture, the Province of Fryslân sets the target of increasing the percentage of 
91
students in trilingual education from 15% in 2018 to 30% by 2023. The Advisory Committee 
welcomes this increase. It was informed by interlocutors from CEDIN, the Centre for 
Educational Services, that their research shows that the trilingual approach has positive effects 
not only on children’s knowledge of the Frisian language, but also of the Dutch language.  
136. The Advisory Committee is pleased to note that, according to information received by 
the Province of Fryslân, the number of final high school exams in the Frisian language increased 
from 66 in 2013 to 138 in 2018. However, the Advisory Committee was also told about 
sporadic cases where students were informally “recommended” not to choose Frisian as a 
course in their last years in secondary school and thus discouraged from taking final high 
school exams in the Frisian language. As the development of writing skills is one of the big 
92
challenges identified by research and addressed in the administrative agreement for the 
Frisian language and culture (see Article 5), the Advisory Committee considers attention to 
secondary education in Frisian as crucial.  
137. The Advisory Committee notes with concern that several interlocutors in the Province 
of Fryslân were not entirely satisfied with the role of the National Education Inspectorate over 
the past years. The authority usually inspects schools once every four years, but in the case of 
the Frisian language the last time this happened was in 2009. At this last visit the Education 
Inspectorate had found that the knowledge of Frisian was very uneven among students and 
that the qualification of teachers and the methodologies available were not sufficient to cope 
93
with this situation. The perception by many stakeholders in the Province of Fryslân, however, 
                                              
89
 See Advisory Committee’s second Opinion on the Netherlands, adopted on 20 June 2013, para. 102.  
90
 Network Trilingual Schools, www.sintrummeartaligens.nl/70/drietalige-school.html#25.  
91
 Administrative Agreement on the Frisian Language and Culture, Chapter 2.6, para. 6.   
92
 E. Klinkenberg/R. Jonkman/N. Stefan (2018) Taal yn Fryslân - de folgjende generaasje (Language in Fryslân  - the 
next generation).  
93
 See Ministry of Education, Culture and Science (30 June 2011), Letter to the House of Representatives on Frisian 
in education, reproduced in Appendix 1 to the Fourth periodical report of the Netherlands on the implementation of 
the ECRML.  
 33 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
143. The Advisory Committee calls on the authorities to ensure that the supply of Frisian and 
bilingual preschools also meets the needs in larger towns in the Province of Fryslân.  
144. The Advisory Committee encourages the authorities to assess the need for providing for 
the possibility of Frisian language teaching in schools and preschools outside the Province of 
Fryslân.  
Frisian language teachers 
Recommendations from the two previous cycles of monitoring 
145. In the previous monitoring cycles, the Advisory Committee noted the increase of Frisian 
teacher training for primary and secondary schools, which, however, was still considered 
insufficient to meet the demands. It recommended the authorities to address the lack of 
qualified Frisian language teachers, including in preschools.  
95
Present situation 
146. Teacher training for primary and secondary school teachers is provided at the 
University of Applied Sciences NHL Stenden. There is a compulsory course for all future primary 
school teachers (about half of them are Frisian native speakers) to obtain basic Frisian reading 
and writing skills, which is to be welcomed. The formal qualification to teach Frisian in primary 
education (foech Frysk) is optional. From the 70 students taking up their studies every year, 
96
about 20 choose this programme. There are also a number of teachers who follow the six-
month course to obtain the foech Frysk qualification. The Advisory Committee takes positive 
note that every couple of years, courses are also offered at the academic teacher training for 
primary education at the University of Groningen.   
147. NHL Stenden also offers a bachelor programme to teach in Frisian in the lower grades of 
secondary education and a master programme to teach in all grades of secondary education. 
Currently, 16 students are studying in the bachelor programme and four students are in the 
master programme. In both primary and secondary teacher training, the number of students 
studying the Frisian language has been relatively stable, but low, over the past five years. 
148. All interlocutors of the Advisory Committee agreed that there is a lack of qualified 
97
Frisian language teachers, both at primary and secondary levels. The Advisory Committee has 
been informed that some schools get into difficulties once the only Frisian teacher falls sick 
because the replacement does often not have the necessary qualifications. According to the 
98
State Report, the chairs of associations representing school boards have indicated to the 
authorities “that increasing the number of teachers qualified to teach Frisian is not their 
highest priority at present” and that “it is up to the profession itself to implement this”. The 
Advisory Committee considers that a supply of well qualified teachers able to teach Frisian as a 
subject as well as a language, be it in bi- or multilingual environments, is of high importance 
                                              
95
 The Advisory Committee also refers in this regard to the findings and recommendations of the Committee of 
Experts on the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in its 5th cycle report on the application of the 
Charter in the Netherlands, adopted on 16 June 2016, paras. 142-147. 
96
 Written information provided by the authorities.  
97
 It has to be noted, however, that there is a general teacher shortage in the Netherlands. See also the information 
provided on the government website, Lerarentekort in het primair onderwijs (Teacher shortage in primary education). 
98
 State Report, Article 12.  
 35 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
155. In the context of the administrative reform, an agreement on Frisian language policy 
was concluded on 4 November 2013 between the government, the Province of Fryslân, and the 
relevant municipalities. In line with Article 5 of the Use of Frisian Act, each municipality was 
requested to develop by 2019 a language plan on the promotion of the Frisian language. The 
Advisory Committee was informed that 13 out of the 15 municipalities in the Frisian area had 
drawn up such policies by end of 2018. In the case of a merger, new Frisian language policies 
are negotiated and adopted. During its visit to the municipality of Súdwest-Fryslân, the 
Advisory Committee learned that the adoption of the new language policy was preceded by a 
consultation of the population.  
156. Officials at provincial and municipal level who met with the Advisory Committee 
explained that in the case of mergers those agreements would usually apply the higher 
standards of the municipalities with high proportions of Frisian speakers to the entire new 
municipalities. Representatives of the minority as well as a research report of the Mercator 
99
Institute assess the situation as more negative. They see a need to monitor the situation very 
closely and to support municipalities both in terms of resources and practical advice so that 
persons in particular in the rural Frisian areas are not left behind as a consequence of the 
mergers.  
Recommendation 
157. The Advisory Committee calls on the authorities to ensure persons belonging to 
national minorities are duly consulted in the development and implementation of language 
policies in the context of municipal mergers.  
158. The Advisory Committee encourages the authorities to set up a permanent and 
structured consultation scheme with Frisian minority NGOs, including youth NGOs and take 
active measures in involving them in the decision-making processes at all levels.  
Articles 17 and 18 of the Framework Convention 
Cross-border co-operation 
Recommendations from the two previous cycles of monitoring 
159. The Advisory Committee encouraged the authorities to further pursue and support co-
operation with the organisations representing Frisians living in other countries. 
Present situation 
160. A wide number of cross-border activities and relations are entertained by the Province 
of Fryslân und other institutions, in particular the Frisian Council (Fryske Rie), which facilitates 
exchanges with the Frisian areas in Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein in Germany. This 
partnership, which also includes the Wadden region, is due to be intensified in the years to 
100
come, as stated in the new Administrative Agreement on the Frisian Language and Culture. 
The Fryske Rie shared with the Advisory Committee its proposals for closer co-operation 
                                              
99
 A.F. Schukking/E.L. Klinkenberg (2018), De rol fan it Frysk by gemeentlike weryndielingen yn Fryslân (The role of 
Frisian in municipal mergers in Fryslân).  
100
 Administrative Agreement on the Frisian Language and Culture 2019-2023, Chapter 7.1, para. 5.  
 37 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
III. CONCLUSIONS 
164. The Advisory Committee considers that the present concluding remarks could serve as 
the basis for the conclusions and recommendations to be adopted by the Committee of 
Ministers with respect to the Netherlands. 
Positive developments following three cycles of monitoring 
165. The Netherlands has comprehensive legislation against discrimination and a well-
developed and sufficiently resourced system of equality bodies, which has been further 
strengthened over the last monitoring cycles. The National Institute for Human Rights has a 
broader mandate than its predecessor, the Equal Treatment Commission. It is complemented 
by the Office of the Ombudsman and 38 Local Anti-Discrimination Bureaus. However, only a 
few cases of alleged discrimination on the grounds of language have been brought to the 
attention of the Local Anti-Discrimination Bureau in the Province of Fryslân and the National 
Institute for Human Rights, even though discrimination on grounds of language is not explicitly 
mentioned in legislation.  
166. The legal protection of the Frisian language rights has made substantial progress over 
the three cycles of monitoring. The administrative agreements concluded every five years 
between the government and the Province of Fryslân have over time become increasingly 
detailed. The Use of Frisian Act, in force since 2014, was a milestone in enshrining Frisian as 
one of the two official languages of the Province of Fryslân and the use of Frisian in 
administration and courts in one single law. Another important step was the decentralisation 
of responsibilities for Frisian language education to the Province through amendments to the 
Dutch Primary Education Act, the Secondary Education Act and the Centres of Expertise Act. 
167. Trilingual schooling is another area where clear progress has been made since the first 
monitoring cycle. While the first Opinion of the Advisory Committee in 2009 praised the 
introduction of the model and the existence of 23 trilingual schools, the number had reached 
53 during the second examination in 2013. Today, the Network of Trilingual Schools counts 
already 85 members. In the meantime, a broad variety of methods has been developed which 
can be used for multilingual teaching. Accompanying research demonstrates that the 
approach, apart from having significant cognitive benefits for the individuals, can contribute to 
intercultural comprehension and co-operation.  
Issues of concern following three cycles of monitoring  
168. The situation of Roma, Sinti and Travellers in the Netherlands has remained an on-going 
concern. Discrimination and inequality remain at high levels, as do stereotypes in the majority 
population. With the exception of thematic and ad hoc consultations such as in the case of the 
new housing policy, no regular and structural consultation mechanism exists. The Advisory 
Committee was concerned by the lack of trust between Roma, Sinti and Traveller communities 
on the one hand and representatives of the authorities on the other hand. (Re-)building mutual 
trust and establishing efficient partnerships at both central and local levels will be key for 
implementing any policy aimed at improving the situation of persons belonging to these 
communities.  
 39 

ACFC/OP/III(2019)003 
102
Further recommendations  
 
 Adopt a more flexible approach towards the scope of application of the Framework 
Convention and enter into a formal dialogue with representatives of groups interested in the 
protection provided by the Framework Convention.  
 
 Incorporate the ground of “language” into the General Equal Treatment Act and invest 
in raising awareness of the anti-discrimination legislation and its applicability and remedies 
available among persons belonging to national minorities. 
 
 Increase efforts to prevent, investigate, prosecute and sanction effectively hate speech 
and hate crime through adequate legislation and sufficiently resourced institutions and raise 
the awareness of persons belonging to minority groups of the possibilities of reporting. 
 
 Ensure that the right to use the Frisian language in contacts with the administration as 
guaranteed by the Use of Frisian Act is fully implemented in practice in all public services and in 
particular in law enforcement, in courts, and at municipal level; dedicate particular attention to 
Frisian language policies in newly merged municipalities and the visibility of the Frisian 
language in public spaces.   
 
 Take all necessary measures to ensure the implementation of the Frisian Language Plan 
in close co-operation with all stakeholders; ensure systemic monitoring by the Education 
Inspectorate; undertake measures to make Frisian language teaching more available at 
preschool level and more attractive at secondary school level and as a profession for teachers; 
assess the need for providing Frisian language teaching outside the Province of Fryslân.  
 
 Ensure Frisian minority representatives are duly consulted in the development and 
implementation of policies, including through setting up a consultation scheme with Frisian 
minority NGOs, including youth NGOs, at provincial level, and through involving minority 
representatives in the context of language policies in the context of municipal mergers.  
 
 
                                              
102
 The recommendations below are listed in the order of the corresponding articles of the Framework Convention 
 41 

