Project Titan – Phase A
Political-societal analysis 
th
October 14 2020
PwC Strategy&

Scope and process: quality, depth and available information
Scope and Process Explanation
Depth of analysis
th
The analysis for phase A was conducted in a relatively short timeframe (1,5 weeks of field work, completed October 14 2020) and covers a broad 
range of topics, multiple islands and segments and relies on public information Therefore, the depth of our analysis is considered to be limited.
Additional research on how absence of air connection impacts traveler behavior required to build more extensive view on political-societal impact. 
Limited Extensive
Access to Management
We did not have access to the management of Titan and employees have also not been involved in the development of Phase A of this report. 
None Good
Access to Information
Titan provided limited, mainly publicly available information, this report is mainly based on publicly available data. 
None Extensive
Clarity of Information
The information used was clear but often applied to the whole market/sector and did not contain insights that are specific to Titan. The detailed 
characteristics of the underlying relations between Titan and its peers and clients is unknown to us and our analysis was conducted based 
on general observations from the industry. Current impact of COVID-19 may impact availability of flight routes, which would render analysis 
indicative as historic information on flight connections was either dated or not readily available
Limited Good
We do not express an opinion on the political and/or social desirability of considering support for Titan. It is up to the client to come to a decision 
Important scope comments and 
independently. The analyses as included have not been validated by Titan and are based on the framework as set out in the “concretisering
guidelines for use of this report
afwegingskader steunaanvragen individuele bedrijven”. Further coordination with Titan management on the analyses may be relevant to avoid 
misunderstandings. Readers should make their own judgements about the reliability and validity of the data. 
3
PwC Strategy&
1) See ‘concretisering afwegingskader’ for more information on the scope of the conducted work

The report covers the analysis according to the political-
societal analysis of ‘afwegingskader steun indiv. bedrijven’
Structure of this document SCOPE 
St. Eustatius Saba St. Maarten
Chapter Topics covered and key points addressed
Company profile
1
Who is Titan and 
• Company information • History
which services 
Introduction
• Business model • Ownership structure
does it provide?
• Financial results • Products, markets and customers
Alternatives Economy Welfare Autonomy
2
Are services 
• Hospital services
• Air carriers
• Declaration human rights
provided by Titan 
Societal impact
• Tourism dependency
• Health travel
• Ferries
• Vital infrastructure
important?
alternatives
• Employment impact
(incl. post)
• Connection loss impact
• Education dependency
High level analysis M&A candidates High level analysis route attractiveness
3
Are other parties 
• Types of parties: airlines & investment firms
• Expected route profitability:
likely/ able to take 
• Drivers possible for take-over:
Unicity
− St. Maarten – Saba
over services 
− Synergy opportunities
− St. Maarten – St. Eustatius
provided by Titan? − Risk & cultural fit
− St. Maarten – Curacao
− Deal readiness & “willingness”
5
PwC Strategy&

As a fully state-owned airline, Titan grew into being the only 
carrier serving all Dutch Caribbean Islands
History and Ownership Structure
History Ownership Structure
Establishment of Titan in St. Maarten, with the vision to 
1961
provide air service to the surrounding Islands
St. Maarten
1976 Acquisition by the Government of the Netherlands Antilles
92.05 %
(9205 shares)
Transfer of ownership to the State of St. Maarten (majority 
Titan
2010
shareholder) and the Netherlands
The Netherlands
Signed Code Share agreement with Airfrance, and entered 
2014
7.95 %
a partnership with Air Antilles
(795 shares)
2017 Signed code share agreements with KLM
• Titan is the national carrier of the St. Maarten
Bankruptcy of Insel Air, made Titan the only carrier on an 
2019
increased selection of routes
• The state of St. Maarten is the majority shareholder
• The Netherlands acquired shares in Titan in 2010, order to safeguard
Services 15 destinations in total, being the only carrier 
2020 1
connectivity, in particular between St. Maarten, Saba and St.-Eustatius
serving all Dutch Caribbean Islands 
7
PwC Strategy&
1) Jaarverslag beheer staatsdeelnemingen 2019; Source: Internal documentation of Titan, Council of Ministers presentation

The report covers the analysis according to the political-
societal analysis of ‘afwegingskader steun indiv. bedrijven’
Structure of this document SCOPE 
St. Eustatius Saba St. Maarten
Chapter Topics covered and key points addressed
Company profile
1
Who is Titan and 
• Company information • History
which services 
Introduction
• Business model • Ownership structure
does it provide?
• Financial results • Products, markets and customers
Alternatives Economy Welfare Autonomy
2
Are services 
• Hospital services
• Air carriers
• Declaration human rights
provided by Titan 
Societal impact
• Tourism dependency
• Health travel
• Ferries
• Vital infrastructure
important?
alternatives
• Employment impact
(incl. post)
• Connection loss impact
• Education dependency
High level analysis M&A candidates High level analysis route attractiveness
3
Are other parties 
• Types of parties: airlines & investment firms
• Expected route profitability:
likely/ able to take 
• Drivers possible for take-over:
Unicity
− St. Maarten – Saba
over services 
− Synergy opportunities
− St. Maarten – St. Eustatius
provided by Titan? − Risk & cultural fit
− St. Maarten – Curacao
− Deal readiness & “willingness”
9
PwC Strategy&

Alternatives
Titan is active on several routes with currently no or limited 
Analysis based on currently available flight information 
– schedules may be impacted by COVID-19
alternative carriers present
(extracted on 13-10-2020)
INDICATIVE
Overview of alternatives on Titan routes
Connects Type of traveler
Alternative air Ferry 
2 Possible impact Exit Titan
Route
1
connections 4
alternative
Municipality Kingdom NL Other Tourist NL Health Local
St. Maarten Saba
No air connection
0 alternative 
St. Maarten St. Eustatius
Reliance on alternative mode of 
3
carriers
travel via ferry (see page 13)
St. Maarten St. Kitts
St. Maarten Antigua
St. Maarten Dominican Republic
One carrier remaining; 
1 
St. Maarten Curacao
lower competition and impact 
alternative 
3 St. Maarten British Virgin Islands
price/ quality level likely
carrier
Curacao Haiti
Guadeloupe Dominica
Curacao Aruba
Curacao Bonaire
More than one carrier 
Curacao Dominican Republic
≥ 2 
remaining; limited impact 
alternative St. Maarten Puerto Rico
on competition and stable 
carriers
price/ quality level expected
St. Maarten St. Barts
St. Maarten Haiti
Dominica St. Maarten
Titan sole carrier on routes 
Titan mainly sole carrier for 
which support health travel 
Dutch municipalities & 
countries within Kingdom NL Dutch municipalities
1) Alternative air connections involve all direct flights and indirect flights with reasonable connection (<2 hours travel time deviation in comparison to direct flights); 2) Routes based on Titan’s operational 
schedule on December 2019, excluding non-active routes (SXM-NEV, SXM-DCF, ANU-DCF, SBH-SAB, CUR-SXM, SXM-PAP); 3) Excluded infrequent carriers which conduct flights during peak
11
PwC Strategy&
season, included flights from Saint Martin in overview of alternative carriers 4) Focuses on necessary health travel to nearest hospital (more details in Welfare section); Source: Titan internal
documentation, Strategy& Analyses on flight and ferry data via skyscanner, flightconnections, flightradar24, openflights.org, rome2rio extracted on 13 October 2020

Alternatives
Welfare loss incurred by passengers as a result of (temporary) 
flight connection outages is estimated to be substantial 
INDICATIVE, SEO 2018
Welfare loss incurred by passengers due to decreased connectivity
Welfare loss for passengers in several scenarios
Total annual Welfare loss per route caused by a loss of air connection Insights based on SEO Report
(in $M)
• SEO Research (2018) estimates loss of welfare for passengers by comparing
generalized costs for passengers and their willingness to pay for a flight
• Main driver of welfare loss is deemed a lack of realistic transport alternatives
Sint Maarten - Curaçao 39
• Conclusions highlight importance safeguarding connectivity within the
Caribbean Netherlands, both in case of temporarily loss of connection and
following permanent exit of large airlines
• PSOs are brought forward as an option to safeguard reliability of air
transport and therefore minimize risk on projected welfare loss
Sint Maarten - Sint Eustatius 16
• Following this report, initiatives have been taken to create alternatives for air
transport in the form of a stronger ferry transport network (pilot to be started in
2020, delayed due to Covid-19)
Applicability of results
Sint Maarten - Saba 13
The analysis considers consumer welfare loss for all passengers:
• Broader set of travelers than only inhabitants of the islands included
• Economic impact on all sectors present on the islands not included
13
PwC Strategy&
1) Based on 15.000 passengers between SXM – EUX / SAB and 40.000 passengers between SXM – CUR
Source: SEO (July 2018). Connectiviteit Caribische deel van het Koninkrijk – Ontwikkelingen, publieke belangen en opties voor borging van connectiviteit

Economy
St. Maarten derives most value from tourists arriving via air –
majority of tourists arrive in Saba & St. Eustatius via air
Tourism Profiles & Expenditures
St. Maarten tourist arrivals & value Saba & St. Eustatius tourist arrivals
The majority (84%, 2019) of tourists reach St. Maarten via cruises – in 
Tourist arrival by mode
particular after Hurricane Irma (Sept 2017), arrivals via air reduced significantly 
• Stay-over tourists can arrive
SStt. M. M SSabaaba
17.000
in Saba via air or by ferry –
Tourist Types (by arrival mode, in thousands) 9%
Cruise
majority of tourists arrive
38% Ferry
2.197 via air
1.951
1.775
1.640
528 1
320 Air • Cruise ship tourism is a small
178
402
share of total tourism – with
52% Air
1.669 1.632 Cruise
1.597
two smaller cruise ships
1.238
arriving in Saba in 2019
2016 2017 2018 2019 2019
Tourists can also arrive 
Contribution of tourist expenditure is higher for tourists arriving via air, 
by small boats – latest 
Tourist arrival by air
due to longer length of stay (~6.5 days air tourism, <24 hours cruise tourism) 
available CBS figures 
SStt. E. E
indicate ~800 small 
2
• St. Eustatius mainly relies on
Indicative total annual expenditure tourists ($M, by arrival mode)
boats in 2016 (~3300 
tourist arrival by air, which
+2%
tourists)
remained stable over the last
215
three years
179 10.500 10.500
10.300
• Cruise tourism is not
common in St. Eustatius,
caused by the set-up of the
Air Cruise 2017 2018 2019 harbor
1) Air tourism assumed to be equal to stay-over tourists – reported stay-over tourists was in the period 2012-2016 equal to tourists arriving by air (Statistical Yearbook 2017)
15
PwC Strategy&
2) Not provided by the department of statistics; indicative figure calculated as number of tourists (2019) x average daily spend (2018; $ 103.73 by air vs. $109.95 by cruise) x average length of stay (2018)
Source: Department of Statistics, St. Maarten, CBS, Strategy& analysis

Economy
Titan expected to employ 146 people in 2020 and supports 
employment of an additional ~125 employees
Direct employment Titan
1
Number of employees Titan, 2014-2020 Observations
Direct employees - Headcount
Titan Representatives 
• The labor force (those either currently employed or willing an able to work)
- Headcount
of St. Maarten, Saba and St. Eustatius consists of 26 246 people, with the bulk
Additional employment, 
living and in St. Maarten:
Hurricane Irma destroyed airports and 
including General Sales 
led to decrease in numbers of tourists
− St. Maarten (2018): 23 146
Agents and Airport 
2
Handling Agents 3
+49%
− St. Eustatius (2019): 1 900
3
146 125
− Saba (2019): 1 200
142
-15%
132
• Titan expected to employ 146 people within its organization in 2020, driven by
additional (pre-COVID-19) jobs for customer service agents, (un)licensed
115
mechanics and dispatchers
98
• Next to this, Titan also supports the direct employment of an additional ~125
employees who provide on ground and sales services on airports
• Assuming all these employees are from either St. Maarten, St. Eustatius of Saba,
Titan directly supports the employment of ~1% of the total labor force
• Titan indicates it facilitates (mandatory) training sessions for employees (P&L
budget notes, 2020), mentioning upcoming training for Operations, Customer
Service and Flight departments and the yearly recurring Flight Safety Training
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020E 2018
1) Source: Jaarverslag beheer staatsdeelnemingen 2019; Brief Winair – Verzoek ondersteuning Winair N.V. (15 juni 2020)
17
PwC Strategy&
2) Source: Caribsky overview 2018
3) Source: CBS - Caribbean Netherlands Workforce (2019)

Welfare
With Titan currently grounded, healthcare transport is 
arranged via – more costly – private charters
Medical Transport from St. Eustatius and Saba
INDICATIVE
Medical transport usually via air COVID-19 altered way of working, driving up transportation costs
• Transport of patients from Bonaire, Saba, and • Flights often cancelled or rescheduled, making regular air transport unreliable for medical transport
St. Eustatius for health related reasons is the
• In order to support travel for medical purposes, ZVK currently uses private charters, often flying twice
responsibility of (Zorgverzekeringskantoor
a week to from Bonaire to different islands and once a week from St. Maarten to Saba and St. Eustatius
BES, or ZVK), which is part of the Ministry
1
• High level, indicative cost-impact analysis indicates transport costs have increased due to COVID-19
of Health, Welfare and Sport
− Additional costs when private charter is utilized at half capacity: + 400-500%
• Population of St. Eustatius and Saba is usually
transported to St. Maarten via air to receive
− Additional costs when private charter is utilized at full capacity: + 150-175%
required health care (other options: Colombia,
• Cost implications strongly depend on ability to combine flights of individuals on private charters
Dominican Republic, Bonaire):
and number of flights executed per year
− Regular flights: book tickets for patients on
scheduled flights
− Private charters: rent plane required due
to medical situation or if multiple patients fly
the same route (in particular which would
otherwise require multiple flights, e.g. St.
Eustatius – Bonaire via St. Maarten)
• Next to this, ZVK arranges transport of
specialists to Saba and St. Eustatius if
required
19
PwC Strategy&
1) Indication of costs based on confidential price information provided by the Ministry

Autonomy
Absence of accessibility negatively impacts wellbeing of 
inhabitants of otherwise almost isolated islands
Impact of accessibility on wellbeing
Freedom to move partly drives happiness Relationship absence of accessibility and wellbeing
Average contribution of key 
Absence of connectivity
1
happiness drivers
Freedom to travel considered 
a basic human right 
100%
Absence of corruption
Ease of travel may partly drive 
sense of freedom and 
Generosity
Decrease • Without accessibility, freedom to travel
wellbeing
13% 2
Freedom to make life choices
freedom
of inhabitants seriously impacted
Healthy life expectancy
Universal Declaration 
20%
of Human Rights 
Article 13
• Lack of affordable travel options may
Lower 
increase differences in opportunities
“(1) Everyone has the right 
wellbeing
25% GDP per capita
between rich and poor:
to freedom of movement 
Increase 
and residence within the 
− Less affluent inhabitants may have
inequality
borders of each state.
fewer means to receive medical care
(2) Everyone has the right
− Less affluent inhabitants may have
to leave any country,
fewer options to go to school
33% Social support including his own, and to
return to his country.”
Decrease • Lack of accessibility may leads to a
GDP decrease of economic activity
World happiness report 2020
1) Contribution calculated as relative impact on overall happiness score within a country
21
PwC Strategy&
2) Response to question, “Are you satisfied or dissatisfied with your freedom to choose what you do with your life?”
Source: World Happiness Report (2020); Inter-American Development Bank (2020) - The inequality crisis

Autonomy
Titan currently plays a role in the postal service within the 
Caribbean – further analyses on role and alternatives required
Deep-dive on postal services 
Current set-up of postal services Role of Titan & Alternatives
• St. Maarten has a local postal service (PSS: Postal Services St. Maarten)
while FXDC Post provides the postal services of Bonaire, St. Eustatius and
• Involvement of Titan in providing transport services is assumed since
Saba:
this is currently the only remaining mode of air transport to Saba and St.
− Mail from the European Netherlands (often government related) is first
Eustatius – further analyses required
brought to Bonaire by KLM, transferred to FXDC, sent to St. Maarten and
• Titan also offers its own Cargo and Express Pack services (via
flown to St. Eustatius and Saba
Inncargo) with guaranteed delivery to any of its destinations:
− Mail to the Netherlands is sent via Curacao or St. Maarten, facing strict
− Regular Air Cargo: ship to and from Saba, St. Eustatius, St. Barts, St.
customs control before being transported to the Netherlands by KLM
Kitts, Nevis, Tortola, Dominica, Guadeloupe
− Interisland and international mail is transported by FXDC, details about
− Express pack service: delivers shipments to all destination airports of
this are not publicly available
Titan
• FXDC has used services of Insel air in the past to transport mail on their
− Door to door pickup & delivery: available on St. Maarten and St. Martin
routes (Insel air filed bankruptcy in 2019), and is currently transporting mail
via Titan – details on collaboration with Titan are not available
• As alternatives, transport by sea could be considered – main
precondition is the assurance that all necessary security guidelines
• Key concerns regarding postal services in St. Eustatius and Saba include:
can be implemented
− Security regulations imposed on mail transport by air
− Capacity on flights
− Complexity of process, involving multiple carriers and postal services
23
PwC Strategy&
Source: Toekomstige ontwikkeling van de Nederlandse postsector (2019)

M&A candidates
An initial high-level analysis aims to determine likelihood of 
Titan being acquired by competing airlines present on SXM
Airline selection & evaluation approach
Selection presents a mix of players with relatively large 
1
presence on St. Maarten to provide high level indication 
A
Selection Approach for Airlines
of fit Titan – additional airlines with smaller presence 
could be subject of further analysis
Classification of Players
2
Non-exhaustive
Local Players
1
High-level 
(Caribbean only)
Filter 1 Filter 2
assessment of 
Presence on SXM >2 locations from/
2 Regional Players
fit with Titan 
(St. Maarten) to St. Maarten
operations
3 International Players
23 airlines
13 airlines
B Assessment Approach
Description of airline and summary Qualitative scoring
Current business Deal drivers Deal inhibitors Synergy Opportunities Risk & cultural fit Deal Readiness
High in case High in case High in case 
• Route complementarity • Deal beneficial for • Limited COVID-19
improves service level economy St. Maarten impact / restructurings/
High-level 
Indication of main reasons Indication of main reasons • Scale cost base provides • Deal complies with positive capital position
Size in €M
1
why airline would consider why airline would not savings potential regulation (BES) • No ongoing deals or
assessment 
Main Routes
purchasing Titan consider purchasing Titan • Cross-selling drives • Post integration cultural other (large) swing
elements
additional sales fit and fit with St. factors ongoing
Maarten • Positive impact on share
price/ valuation acquiror
25
PwC Strategy&
1) Assumed that airline outside of BES territories can purchase Titan, as long as ownership and control of Titan is located on Bonaire, St. Eustatius or Saba or an exception is
granted – to be further validated; 2) Other airlines include JetBlue, United Airlines, Air France, Delta, Spirit Airlines, Air Canada and Air Transit

M&A candidates
Impact COVID-19 on the airline industry suggests that airlines 
have limited appetite to invest in M&A
COVID-19 severely impacts aviation industry Airlines not expected to turn cash positive until 2022
InterVISTAS scenario’s on impact COVID-19 on aviation
Airline industry quarterly cash burn forecast ($ bn during quarter)
2020Q2 2020Q3 2020Q4 2021Q1 2021Q2 2021Q3 2021Q4
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
• International Air Transport Association (IATA, representing ~290 airlines  or 82% of air
traffic) estimates 2020Q2 to be the worst quarter for airlines as industry faced severe
revenue loss (~80% compared to same period previous years) while operating costs were
brought down ~50% due to unavoidable semi-fixed costs (e.g.: labor and maintenance)
• InterVISTAS estimates 44% - 73% passenger traffic demand loss in 2020 • 2021 is expected to remain challenging due to lower revenue per traveler (as airlines
lower prices to foster demand during COVID-19), typically weak demand in winter and
• Airline industry characterized by high (semi-) fixed costs, meaning demand loss will result
unavoidable fixed costs
in significant deterioration of profitability and capital position
27
PwC Strategy&
Sources: Intervistas, IATA Economic analysis

This Report and any dispute which may arise out of or in connection with it, shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Netherlands.
www.pwc.nl
© 2020 PwC. All rights reserved. PwC refers to the PwC network and/or one or more of its member firms, each of which is a separate legal entity. Please see www.pwc.com/structure for further details.
PwC Strategy&

