Convention  
on Biological Diversity
Fifth National Report of the Kingdom of the Netherlands

Convention  
on Biological Diversity
Fifth National Report of the Kingdom of the Netherlands

 Introduction 18
 Structure 19
 The Kingdom of the Netherlands  19
I - Update on biodiversity status, trends, and threats and implications  
for human well-being 20
1.1  Importance of biodiversity for the Kingdom of the Netherlands 21
1.2  Major changes that have taken place in the status and trends of biodiversity. 26
1.3 Main threats to biodiversity 34
1.4  Impacts of the changes in biodiversity for ecosystem services and the socio-economic  
and cultural implications of these impacts 41
1.5  Possible future changes for biodiversity and their impacts (optional) 42
II - The national biodiversity strategy and action plan (NBSAP),  
its implementation, and the mainstreaming of biodiversity 44
2.1  Biodiversity targets set by the Netherlands  45
2.2  Update of the NBSAP to incorporate these targets and to serve as an effective instrument  
for mainstreaming biodiversity  45
2.3  Actions taken to implement the Convention since the fourth report and outcomes of  
these actions  47
2.4  Effectiveness of mainstreaming biodiversity into relevant sectoral and cross-sectoral  
strategies, plans and programmes 50
2.5  The extent to which the NBSAP has been implemented  54
III - Progress towards the 2015 and 2020 Aichi Biodiversity Targets and  
contributions to the relevant 2015 targets of the MDGs 58
3.1  Progress made towards the implementation of the Strategic Plan for  
Biodiversity 2011-2020 and it’s Aichi Biodiversity Targets?  59
 Appendixes 79
Contents | 5

Executive summary
The fifth national report is used by the Conference of the Internationally The Netherlands also works on biodiversity 
Parties to assess the status of implementation of the related issues with the aim of preventing negative impacts 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). It will provide on tropical forests, mangrove forests, marine and other 
information for a mid-term review of progress towards the ecosystems, and on constraints on the trade in endangered 
implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity species and products made of these species. Partially via 
2011-2020 and progress towards the Aichi Biodiversity support for sustainable development programmes in its 
Targets. The (CBD) has 3 main objectives: development cooperation portfolio and via climate 
1. The conservation of biological diversity. funding, partially also by facilitating the formation of 
2. The sustainable use of the components of biological coalitions of Dutch businesses, CSOs, knowledge institutes 
diversity. and government institutions around value chains like 
3. The fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out timber, soy, palm oil and shrimps that are critical to 
of the utilization of genetic resources. biodiversity; Dutch multinational agri-businesses are also 
This report shows the contribution of the Netherlands to motivated by the Dutch government ‘to look beyond value 
these objectives. chains’ into the sustainability of the landscapes around 
agricultural production areas in (sub-)tropical countries. 
The National Ecological Network (NEN), including 164 EU The Kingdom of the Netherlands also includes six islands 
Natura 2000-sites, is the cornerstone of biodiversity and marine areas within the Caribbean biodiversity hotspot. 
conservation in the Netherlands. The development of the This executive summary elaborates on each of the questions 
NEN began in 1990 and it is still increasing in size. The NEN, provided by the CBD for the Netherlands. It then describes 
in combination with management measures and a the situation in the Caribbean Netherlands and concludes 
substantial decline of environmental pressures, has slowed with the autonomous Caribbean countries of Aruba, 
down the rate of biodiversity loss in the Netherlands. In the Curacao and Saint Maarten. 
last three years the Dutch government decentralised 
responsibilities of realization and management of nature to The Netherlands doesn’t have one National Biodiversity 
the provinces. In 2013 ambitions towards 2027 were agreed Strategy Action Plan (NBSAP) but has integrated the Aichi 
upon in the so called Nature Pact between the national targets into several policy plans like the Nature Pact and 
government and the provinces, including extension of the Natural Capital Agenda. A nature vision will become 
NEN, management of nature and environmental available in April 2014. 
conditions, improving the system of nature management by 
farmers and more cross-sectoral strategies to integrate 
nature management with other spatial functions.
Ongoing urbanisation, transport and industrial, agricultural 
and fishery activities cause environmental pressures on 
biodiversity. The reforms of the EU Common Agriculture 
Policy and Common Fisheries Policy can become important 
milestones for reducing their impact and to improve the 
sustainable use of the components of biological diversity. 
Also legislation on environmental and spatial issues is 
important in this respect. Society becomes more and more 
aware of the importance of biodiversity and the need for 
ecosystem restoration and sustainable use of ecosystem 
services. In consultation with civil society groups the Dutch 
government has developed a number of biodiversity policy 
documents contributing to the CBD-goals. 
Executive summary | 7

Q1: Why is biodiversity important for  However these success stories cannot disguise the fact 
that, despite all efforts, biodiversity loss still continues. 
your country?
Many threatened Red List species show further population 
In 2005 the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment pointed out declines, with farmland birds among the most dramatic. 
that human well-being and socio-economic development is Europe’s most valuable and threatened species and habitat 
based more or less directly on the delivery of ecosystem types are protected under Natura 2000. However, the 
services, such as food, fibre, fuel, water supply and the conservation status of 75% of the protected species and 95% 
control of natural hazards. While we have come a long way in of habitat types for which the Netherlands hold 
gaining our independence from the limits of our physical responsibility, have recently been assessed as more or less 
environment, a sound understanding of the relevance of unfavourable. In general, the more generalist species 
biodiversity and natural resources is necessary to achieve the increase in number whereas specialist species decrease. A 
sustainable use of biodiversity and ecosystem services. This similar homogenisation process can be observed among 
understanding begins with general awareness about the agro-genetic species. The selection of the most productive 
importance of biodiversity and participation in conservation. breeds caused rapid declines of agro-genetic diversity in 
 The importance of biodiversity can be made more explicit both livestock and crops. To date 92% of Dutch livestock 
when its economic, social and cultural values are quantified breeds are regarded as threatened, while inbreeding 
in euro’s or employment. In order to show the economic threatens half of the remaining 8%. Nowadays conservation 
value of ecosystem services the Dutch Government of these species largely depends on hobbyist breeders and 
commissioned the TEEB studies (The Economics of garden keepers, rather than on farmers. 
Ecosystems and Biodiversity) in 2011. These studies aim to 
support the decision-making process for policy-making and 
large investment projects of government, business and civil Q3: What are the main threats to 
society. The results of the TEEB-study ‘Green, healthy and 
biodiversity?
productive’ among others indicate that investing in green 
spaces, particularly in urban areas, reduces health care costs To date habitat fragmentation, atmospheric nitrogen 
and absenteeism at work, which may represent an deposition, desiccation and acidification are still major 
economic value of hundreds of millions of euro’s. threats to terrestrial biodiversity in the Netherlands. While 
spatial connectivity is improved and the natural area 
increased by the NEN, spatial requirements for some species 
Q2: What major changes have taken will still not be met. While nitrogen deposition decreased 
substantially due to environmental measures to reduce the 
place in the status and trends of 
pressures, such as emission measures in agricultural 
biodiversity in your country? practice, two-thirds of the natural area still exceeds the 
critical load for nitrogen deposition. Desiccation is still also 
The efforts to halt biodiversity loss in the Netherlands present in over 90% of the area of groundwater dependent 
effectively began with the implementation of the National nature. At sea the main threat to biodiversity still comes 
Ecological Network (NEN) from 1990 onwards. The NEN has from pollution due to discharges and the fishing industry, 
improved, connected and extended natural areas, including where trawling and by-catch in particular are threatening 
164 sites designated under Natura 2000, the centrepiece of bottom fauna and long living slow reproducing species, like 
EU nature & biodiversity policy. The NEN has reversed the sharks and rays. Though the threats described above are 
loss of natural area and created an increase, mostly through (gradually) declining, the threat of potentially invasive 
nature development on former agricultural land. Together exotic species entering the Netherlands is increasing, and 
with an environmental policy that diminished may be enabled through the influence of climate change. 
environmental pressure, such as desiccation, water and air 
pollution, it gradually slowed down the rate of biodiversity 
loss. After years of increase, the number of Red List animal Q4: What are the impacts of the 
and plant species has more or less stabilised. Wintering and 
changes in biodiversity for 
migrating bird numbers have almost doubled in the past 30 
years. Most commercial fish stocks have recovered or are ecosystem services and the socio-
recovering from periods of overfishing. Reintroductions of 
economic and cultural 
species like Otter (Lutra lutra) and Beaver (Castor fiber) are 
generally regarded as successful and the return of other implications of these impacts?
inspirational species like Common crane (Grus grus) and 
White-tailed Eagle (Haliaeetus albicilla) to the Netherlands is The policy and research on ecosystem services is quite new 
also a positive development. in the Netherlands, but substantial efforts are being 
The Netherlands | 9

economy, construction and food. Several actions have also certification schemes. Therefore a Green Deal ‘Promoting 
been taken to further raise biodiversity awareness, among Sustainable Forest Management’ was signed in 2013 between the 
which the release of the policy programme ‘Progress in Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs and 27 Dutch public and 
Sustainability, By Social Innovation for a Green Economy’’. From private parties in the timber sector in order to get more 
2014 onwards concrete actions and outcomes of the ‘Natural certified wood from sustainably managed tropical forests on 
Capital Agenda 2013’ will be integrated within this the Dutch timber market. In March 2013 the EU Timber 
programme. Regulation (EUTR) came into effect, which prohibits illegally 
harvested timber (products) from being placed on the EU 
market. The Netherlands still needs to ensure at national and 
Q8: How effectively has biodiversity EU level that imported FSC and PEFC certified timber can 
enter a ‘green lane’ under the EUTR to prevent timber 
been mainstreamed into relevant 
harvesting and trading companies from having to go 
sectoral and cross-sectoral through elaborate protocols twice. The round tables for soy 
and palm oil, initiated by the Dutch Trade Initiative, have 
strategies, plans and 
contributed to a decreasing rate of deforestation in tropical 
programmes? countries. 
The Dutch government carries out substantial efforts In the last four years the Netherlands has played an 
aiming to mainstream biodiversity in a wide range of important role in debates around the negative 
sectors. Most relevant in this sense are the agriculture, environmental and social effects, particularly in (sub-)
forestry and fishery sectors. With approx. 60% of land-use, tropical countries, of the EU climate mitigation policies to 
the agricultural sector dominates the terrestrial landscape. blend fossil fuels and biofuels. Dutch and local NGO’s and 
This highly mechanised and productive sector depends on knowledge institutes were supported by the Dutch 
high levels of external inputs like mineral fertilizer, manure, government to conduct research in the field of biofuels, to 
livestock feed, pesticides and energy. As such the pilot new biofuel production options and related 
development of the sector over the last 60 years can be technology such as cooking devices based on biofuels, and 
regarded one of the important causes for the loss of natural to raise awareness around positive and negative effects of 
habitat and a decrease in environmental conditions. Over biofuels.
the same period the level of input has steadily decreased  Major steps taken by the fishery sector, such as catch 
due to increasing efficiency and the use of environmentally quotas and fleet capacity reduction, turned out to be 
less damaging alternatives. Integration of nature effective. Important commercial fish stocks such as herring, 
management with farming has long been one of the sole and plaice in de North Sea have recovered or are 
answers to this. The efforts in the past 20 years to restore or recovering from overfishing. Trawling with chain beams 
maintain nature areas and wild species on agricultural land, and by-catch are still a major concern though, especially for 
has recently been assessed as not effective enough on a bottom fauna and long living, slow reproducing species. 
national scale and the structure of agri-environmental Measures to reverse these impacts, like the forbidding of 
schemes is therefore currently being revised. The new discards, will be subject of the next EU Common Fisheries 
approach focuses on groups of farmers integrating nature Policy (CFP) which will enter into force in 2014. The 
management in their farming system, jointly covering a consumption of Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) labeled 
substantial area. It is expected that the effects of this fish is increasing. 
agri-environmental scheme on biodiversity will be positive  Substantial efforts have also been made to make the 
over much larger areas. Moreover this collective way of (small) aquaculture sector which mainly concerns Blue Shell 
agricultural nature management should also improve the Mussel (Mytilus edulis) and the threatened Eel (Anguilla anguilla) 
resilience and efficiency of the whole agri-environmental more sustainable. Reproduction of Eel in captivity is still 
system. A revised EU Common Agricultural Policy will hardly possible. The Netherlands therefore also take part in 
become effective in the new CAP period 2014-2020. the “Coalition of the Willing for a High Seas Marine 
Protected Area” which aims to give the Caribbean Sargasso 
The forestry sector took major steps to increase the Sea (the nursery ground of the European Eel) the status of Marine 
proportion of wood from sustainably managed forests on Protected Area. The effects are promising. Several important 
the Dutch market, 92% of which is imported. No less than actions for mainstreaming biodiversity into the most 
65.7% of timber products sold in the Netherlands was FSC or relevant cross-sectoral strategies are defined in the Natural 
PEFC certified in 2011. The amount originating from Capital Agenda.
sustainably managed biodiversity rich tropical forests was 
39% and has more than doubled since 2008. So far forestry in 
temperate zones is mainly benefitting from timber 
The Netherlands | 11

Ecosystems like heather and open dune areas did not problem for instance has more or less been solved, while 
improve and their habitats still degrade, but the degrada- nitrogen deposition and eutrophication of surface waters 
tion of habitats in marsh land stopped. has substantially decreased. However, pollution by 
agricultural nutrients is still above critical levels and is 
Aichi-target 6. Sustainable management of marine living resources (by detrimental to ecosystem function and biodiversity. The 
2020). Dutch government and the provincial governments prepare 
For most of the important commercial fish, the stocks are the Programmatic Approach Nitrogen (PAS) in order to 
currently within safe biological limits. However, not all reduce nitrogen pollution mainly by intensive livestock 
effects of unsustainable fishery have been restored. breeding. Measures will be taken to reduce nitrogen 
 Vulnerable long lived shark and ray species are still emissions on the one hand and nature restoration measures 
critically endangered or threatened. The European Union is on the other hand. Also, member states of the EU are 
responsible for policies for management of marine living obliged to renew their action programme under the Nitrates 
resources in Europe and countries where European fisheries Directive (ND; 91/676/EEG) every four years. The Nitrates 
operate: Common Fishery Policy (CFP). In addition to that Directive aims to prevent or decrease water pollution caused 
the Netherlands Government stimulates (technical) by nitrates from agricultural sources. The renewed (5th) 
innovations aiming at more sustainable fisheries, while Dutch action programme will become effective in the 
management plans for marine Natura 2000-sites and a beginning of 2014. This programme aims to establish, on 
Marine Strategy Framework Directive are currently being average, equilibrium fertilisation as regards phosphate, and 
developed in order to conserve marine biodiversity. The aims to achieve, on average, the target value of 50 mg/l in 
Wadden Sea in the North of the Netherlands is an groundwater in all areas of the country. Thus, the 
internationally recognised UNESCO natural Heritage Site programme will also contribute to the achievement of 
with an abundance of marine species. It is also a crucial Water Framework Directive (WFD) goals. However, to 
foraging site for large numbers of migratory birds on the actually achieve these goals, an intensified effort is 
flyway from Scandinavia to Africa. necessary. The WFD River Basin Management Plans which 
will be established in 2015 are the framework for this effort. 
Aichi-target 7. Sustainable agriculture, aquaculture and forestry (by In this respect, it is relevant that under Rural Development 
2020). Program 3 (RDP3), a significant sum of money will be set 
Sustainability and biodiversity are more and more aside to help achieve ND and WFD goals.
integrated within the Dutch agriculture, aquaculture and 
forestry sectors. Biodiversity is fully integrated within Aichi-target 9. Invasive alien species prevented and controlled (by 
forestry and a small but growing part of Dutch agriculture is 2020).
certified as biological agriculture. The ‘regular’ agricultural The number of alien plant and animal species in the 
sector as a whole is moving towards sustainability in Netherlands still increases. Because it is not clear when an 
production and consumption, but developments are slow. alien species becomes invasive and it is difficult to eradicate 
The emissions of nitrogen and phosphates into the them once settled, Dutch policy, since 2007, is focused on 
environment have decreased but are still above the critical prevention. Prevention is mainly achieved by agreements 
limits. The population of birds on farmland is still (e.g. on the sale of invasive water plant species), and 
decreasing and considerable efforts are being made to find a complementary to this, the Dutch Flora and Fauna Act 
new system to improve biodiversity on farmland. The recent prohibits the release of animal and plant species in the wild 
establishment of ‘Veldleeuwerik’, a coalition of farmers, which makes it possible to act if invasive alien species are 
biological seeds breeding companies and Integrated Pest introduced. In some cases eradiction actions have been 
Management (IPM) specialists, farm sector organisations, undertaken. In September 2013 the European Commission 
agri-businesses like Heineken Beer and provincial published a dedicated legislative instrument (regulation) on 
authorities aiming to promote sustainable agriculture, is Invasive Alien Species. The Netherlands supports this 
considered to be a breakthrough in terms of within sector initiative and will work together with the European member 
collaboration and joined-up sustainable thinking. It is an states on the establishment of a list of invasive alien species 
example of what can be accomplished in a short period of of European interest.
time in terms of increasing production and productivity 
when biological sub-sector players join forces. This can also Aichi-target 10. Pressures on vulnerable ecosystems reduced (by 2015)
create a new export market e.g. for biological seed breeding The Dutch Wadden Sea is one of the most valuable and 
companies and IPM specialists. vulnerable ecosystems, with its intertidal mudflats that are 
among other things exposed to sea-level rise due to climate 
Aichi-target 8. Pollution reduced (by 2020). change. Millions of migratory and resident birds, thousands 
The environmental conditions in the Netherlands have of seals and other species depend on this ecosystem. A 
substantially improved since the 1990’s. The acidification nature rehabilitation programme ‘Towards a healthy 
The Netherlands | 13

Aichi-target 20. Financial resources from all sources increased (by in the areas of international nature, forest, water and 
2020). biological diversity. 
The Netherlands has compiled data on biodiversity related 
Official Development Assistance ODA spending for the The multi-annual plan Climate, Energy, Environment and 
period 2006-2010 for the EU Monterrey Accountability Water as well as the Natural Capital Agenda 2013 describes 
Report. These figures can also be used to calculate the ODA several actions in developing countries, that are to be 
component of the Dutch baseline for the CBD agreement on supported by the Netherlands in the coming years, and 
resource mobilization to support poor countries for the which are in line with the MDG targets. A conference on 
protection and sustainable use of their biodiversity. Other food and biodiversity will be organised by the NL Ministry of 
financial resources for biodiversity come from Ministries, Economic Affairs in 2014 to generate practical 
NGO’s for nature conservation like WWF-Netherlands with recommendations for a better synergy between biodiversity 
ca 2.2 million contributing members and from Dutch and food production. These will also be applied in Dutch 
companies. Currently no reliable estimates are available for supported projects on integrated land use planning in (sub) 
these financial streams. tropical developing countries. Some of these projects will 
be conducted in areas with high biodiversity potential. 
The Hyderabad commitments, for doubling total Where possible they will be linked to food security or water 
biodiversity-related international financial resource flows to programmes that are funded by the Ministry of Foreign 
developing countries in 2015 compared to the baseline Affairs and Dutch Embassies. In cooperation with Dutch 
2006-2010, was agreed as a global collective target during multinational businesses and other potential funders at 
the 11th Conference of the Parties to the Convention on least two projects will be implemented to restore degraded 
Biological Diversity (COP 11, Hyderabad 2012). Current ecosystems. These pilots have to prove that businesses 
actions by the Netherlands are in line with the agreements understand their long term interests in a sustainable supply 
made at COP 11 in terms of stabilising the level of spending of biotic products and raw materials can and will contribute 
for global biodiversity. In the coming years The Netherlands to ecosystem restoration and that degraded areas can be 
will develop a methodology to estimate the contributions of converted into productive and biodiverse systems.
Dutch non-governmental players to the accomplishment of 
the Aichi targets. 
Q12: What lessons have been learned 
from the implementation of the 
Q11: What has been the contribution 
Convention in your country?
of actions to implement the 
Convention towards the The Dutch government installed a Taskforce on Biodiversity 
and Natural Resources in order to evaluate the current 
achievement of the relevant 2015 
situation and to look for the best ways and methods to 
targets of the Millennium protect biodiversity and to use biodiversity sustainably. The 
Taskforce’s composition reflected this broad challenge. Its 
Development Goals in your 
members came from different groups in society: trade and 
country? industry, science, social organisations and the government. 
The following recommendations were presented to the 
The environment as a component of sustainable government on December 13th 2011: 
development is integrated in most policies and 
interventions of the Directorate General for International •	 Raising awareness for a sound understanding of the 
Cooperation (DGIS) such as: attention for environment- relevance of biodiversity and natural resources for our 
related services, “greening” of all relevant development economy and wellbeing;
sectors and sustainable management of the worlds’ •	 Efficient land use, meaning that agriculture should take 
ecosystems. The Netherlands particularly aims to contribute place in the areas most suitable for it and that nature is 
to achieving the Millennium Development Goals MDG1, preserved in coherent ecological networks;
MDG7 and MDG8: linking poverty alleviation to the •	 Greening the economy to reduce the pressure from Dutch 
sustainable use of natural resources, creating a better production and consumption patterns on biodiversity;
environment and facilitating sustainable and equitable •	 Coherent government policy by all relevant policy areas, 
growth (in clean and green trade chains). including agriculture and fisheries, international 
cooperation, environmental policy, industry policy and 
The PROFORIS database contains information on trade policy;
Netherlands Government funded programmes and projects •	 Establishing public-private partnerships.
The Netherlands | 15

Areas, mainly as a result of the persistent advocacy work user fees help defray nature management costs. Key recent 
from the NGO conservation sector on the island. Largely policy decisions have been the legal institution of a Saint 
uncontrolled tourism related recreational pressure and Maarten Marine Park and a shark fishing moratorium to 
disturbance are a growing threat to Aruba’s nature and protect these apex predators. These developments signal a 
archaeological sites all of which could be considered as new dynamism in the biodiversity decision making and 
major long term tourism assets. implementation on the island of Saint Maarten.
 There are, nevertheless, various biodiversity related 
initiatives, which have been in place for some time. Most 
important among these is the “Ruimtelijke Ordeningsplan 
Voorschriften” (ROPV), which aims to provide a land-use 
zoning for the island and cooperation with other Kingdom 
partners to develop and implement a plan for the 
management of the (offshore) biological resources of the 
Dutch Caribbean EEZ. Civil society and private sector players 
actively participate in the development of these policies. 
Curacao
As the largest and most populous island, Curacao has always 
benefitted from its stronger institutional tradition and 
capacity both in terms of government departments and 
capable NGOs. Curacao is the only Dutch Caribbean island 
to have a legally-instituted land-use and urban zoning plan 
in place which allows full legal designation of conservation 
areas. There is still heavy pressure due to continued 
urbanization in the framework of large-scale touristic 
development. However, there are several failed or 
struggling, often big tourism projects across the island and 
it has been suggested that large scale development for 
tourism should be limited. The island possesses the largest, 
least disturbed and most resilient ecosystems of the leeward 
Dutch Caribbean and its biodiversity state (e.g. vegetation, 
endangered species) has improved significantly in recent 
decades. However, institutional capacity around biodiversity 
management on Curacao could be strengthened, for 
example by clustering and pooling human resources. A 
worthy policy advance since 10/10/10 has been the legal 
designation of four RAMSAR wetlands on the island, but the 
management of these sites is still weak. Curacao is also 
participating in discussions with other Kingdom partners 
for the purpose of developing a comprehensive plan for the 
management of the (offshore) biological resources of the 
Dutch Caribbean EEZ as a whole.
Saint Maarten
Of the three independent Kingdom partners in the Dutch 
Caribbean, Saint Maarten is the island facing the greatest 
imminent threat to nature in terms of habitat destruction, 
which is proceeding at an alarming pace. Nevertheless, 
institutional capacity and expertise has grown recently, not 
only on the part of government ministries, but also in the 
NGO sector. Important policy trajectories are currently on 
track among the most important of which is the planned 
implementation of a land-use zoning law. Government 
financing of NGO management has improved slightly as 
well as application of the “user pays” principle, where park 
The Netherlands | 17

Introduction
The fifth national report is used by the Conference of the Structure
Parties to assess the status of implementation of the The guidelines of the fifth National Report request that the 
Convention on Biological Diversity. It will provide structure of the fifth national report consists of headings 
information for a mid-term review of progress towards the according to three main parts and the sub-sections of each 
implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity part according to the questions set out in the guidelines. 
2011-2020 and progress towards the Aichi Biodiversity Hence, the main structure is fixed. Information and findings 
Targets. The fifth national reports will also contribute to the on status, trends and threats from part I and the actions 
development of the fourth edition of the Global Biodiversity taken at national level described in part II are used to assess 
Outlook. Further, the fifth national report guidelines how those actions have contributed to progress towards the 
request Parties to report on contributions to the relevant 2020 Aichi Biodiversity Targets and to the achievements of 
2015 Targets of the Millennium Development Goals. the relevant targets of the Millennium Development Goals.
The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) entered into 
force on 29 December 1993 has 3 main objectives: 
1. The conservation of biological diversity. The Kingdom of the Netherlands 
2.  The sustainable use of the components of biological The Kingdom of the Netherlands has its territory in Europe 
diversity. and in the Caribbean, and consist of four countries: The 
3.  The fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out Netherlands, Aruba, Curaçao and Saint Maarten. The latter 
of the utilization of genetic resources. three are located in the Caribbean. The Netherlands is 
located in Western Europe except for the municipalities, 
This report shows the contribution of the Netherlands to Bonaire, Saint Eustatius, and Saba that are located in the 
achieve these objectives. Caribbean. The Netherlands consist of roughly 98% of the 
kingdom’s land area and population. Biodiversity in the 
Caribbean is very different from biodiversity in Western 
Europe. If data availably allows a distinction, the countries 
are discussed separately. 
Introduction | 19

1.1 Importance of biodiversity for the  people who financially support non-governmental nature 
conservation organisations, such as Natuurmonumenten 
1
Kingdom of the Netherlands
and the World Wide Fund for Nature, which both have 
Human well-being and socio-economic development is around 800.000 members (see fig 1). In total however a 
based more or less directly on the delivery of ecosystem decreasing trend can be observed which might be due to the 
services, such as food, shelter, water supply, the control of economic crisis. In 2012 Natuurmonumenten set up the 
natural hazards (MEA 2005). While we have come a long way Oerr club for children. The club aims to stimulate children 
in gaining our independence from the limits of our physical up to 12 years to play outside and discover nature. Oerr had 
environment, a sound understanding of the relevance of 150.000 new members in 2013.
biodiversity and natural resources for our economy and 
wellbeing is necessary to achieve sustainable use of 
Box 1. Webcam project ‘Enjoy Spring’
biodiversity and ecosystem services and to make a lasting 
‘Enjoy Spring’ (Beleef de Lente) is a webcam project of 
turn towards green growth (Taskforce biodiversiteit en 
the Netherlands Association for the Protection of 
natuurlijke hulpbronnen, 2011). This section will highlight 
Birds (Vogelbescherming Nederland). Since 2007 this 
the current status and trends concerning public awareness 
organisation has been installing webcams near the 
about the importance of biodiversity and participation of 
nests of several breeding bird species such as eagle 
citizens in its conservation (§1.1.1); and the efforts made to 
owl (Bubo bubo), white stork (Ciconia ciconia), peregrine 
assess the economic, social and cultural values of 
falcon (Falco peregrinus) and blackbird (Turdus merula). It 
biodiversity and ecosystem services. Some results to date 
allows the public to enjoy birdlife through internet 
will be presented in §1.1.2. This section ends with a 
from the beginning of March till the end of June. 
presentation of exceptional biodiversity and ecosystems 
The project is a big success. In 2012 the project 
within the Kingdom of the Netherlands (§1.1.3). 
received 900.000 unique visitors, which increased to 
1.1 million unique visitors originating from some 150 
1.1.1  Awareness on the importance of biodiversity 
different countries in 2013. Over four months the 
and participation in conservation
website was visited 49 million times. It’s a kind of 
Netherlands
‘real life soap opera’ of the species concerned. Happy 
In the Netherlands the awareness of the importance of 
events like the hatching of eggs are alternated with 
biodiversity is limited but increases, especially among 
‘cruel’ events, like a stork eating one of its own chicks 
youngsters. More than half (54%) of the Dutch population 
and pushing another one out of the nest. 
knows about biodiversity in terms of biodiversity loss, 
Other organisations like the Dutch Forestry Service 
against 49% in 2007. Only a limited group (around 10%) 
(Staatsbosbeheer) contributed to the success with 
rejects the need for nature protection (McKinsey & 
webcams in and near a fox hole (Vulpes vulpes) and a 
Company, 2010; Gallup Organisation, 2010). In 2013 a survey 
beaver lodge (Castor fiber).
was carried out by TNS Political & Social network in the 27 
Member States of the European Union about attitudes 
towards biodiversity (Flash Eurobarometer 379). Compared 
to the average respondents in Europe, the Dutch are less Every five years since 1997 the Netherlands Environmental 
familiar with the term ‘biodiversity’ however, they are also Assessment Agency has ordered public support surveys to 
more likely to say that they feel informed about biodiversity study public opinion on nature conservation issues (De Boer 
loss than respondents in other EU countries. About 75 % of et al, in prep.). In 2013, a large majority of the respondents 
the Dutch respondents think biodiversity loss is a fairly or a valued the protection of wildlife areas (92%), and the 
very serious problem, but this proportion is less than in protection of rare plant and animal species (85%). Public 
most other European countries. opinion on these matters had hardly changed since 1996, 
 Most Dutch citizens show medium to high awareness of 2001 and 2006. A major change in the 2013 survey is that the 
the importance of nature protection. This is among others public now attaches much lower priority (from 77% down to 
reflected in the popularity of the webcam project ‘Enjoy 65%) to the development of new nature areas than before. 
Spring’ (Box 1) or the cinema production Nieuwe Wildernis In 2001, 56% of the respondents mentioned ‘nature 
(New Wilderness), about the Oostvaardersplassen protected conservation’ as one of the four top priorities for the 
area, which received almost 500.000 visitors in the first government, compared to only 21% in the 2006 survey. 
month after its release in September 2013. Since 2006 this percentage is 19% in 2013 and thus more or 
 The level of awareness is reflected in the number of less stable since then. Apparently, in times of crisis and 
financial cuts, citizens change their views on priorities for 
national policy. Since 2001 employment as a policy theme 
1 
Where ‘Netherlands’ is mentioned in this report, it refers to the 
became more important. Answers to questions on people’s 
Western European part. Information from the Caribbean islands will 
considerations about dilemmas surrounding socio-
be referred to by their name or ‘Caribbean Netherlands’.
I - Update on biodiversity status, trends, and threats and implications for human well-being | 21

National nature work day
number of participants
number of locations
500
16000
450
14000
400
12000
350
10000
300
8000 250
200
6000
150
4000
100
2000
50
0 0
2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013
2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013
Figure 2. Trend for the number of participants in and locations for the ‘National Nature Work Day’ (source: Landschapsbeheer Nederland). 
The number of members of Nature and Environment On Bonaire there is also a strong volunteer involvement in 
Education (IVN) increased from 19.568 in 2010 to 20.688 in bird conservation activities. For at least 10 years volunteers 
2012. These volunteers of IVN organise educational activities have participated in a yearly parrot count, at first 
such as excursions, courses and campaigns at schools to coordinated by the island government and the National 
promote sustainability and nature activities. Park Foundation, and subsequently by the Echo foundation, 
an NGO fully dedicated to parrot conservation on the island. 
Caribbean Netherlands Similarly, the signature flamingo population on Bonaire has 
Environmental issues in the Caribbean Netherlands receive been monitored with the help of volunteers since the 
a great deal of media attention through the operations of nineteen eighties. However, the majority of the volunteers 
the many NGOs. The material produced is readily published involved in nature conservation are expatriates from Europe 
and televised. Access to and cooperation with the media is and the United States. Participation by the local island 
excellent. In addition, the public is relatively well educated community is somewhat less developed. 
and well informed. 
 Awareness about nature conservation issues in the Dutch 1.1.2 Economic, social and cultural values of  
Caribbean is generally considered high though indicators do biodiversity and ecosystem services
not exist. Protected area management organisations have Netherlands
well organised education and outreach programmes as well The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (www.maweb.org) 
as strong after school programmes for local school age defined Ecosystem Services as “the benefits people derive 
children. Protected area management organisations also from ecosystems”. Besides provisioning services or goods 
work, mainly overseas, with volunteers to support them in like food, wood and other raw materials, many ecosystems 
their basic management such as maintaining trails as well as also provide essential regulating services. Some of these are 
for the execution of their monitoring programmes. quite well-known like the services for water purification 
Sea Turtle Conservation Bonaire (STCB) has had over 20 years and recreation. The active use of coastal dunes for water 
of experience protecting the sea turtles on Bonaire with the purification for instance dates back to mid-19th century. To 
help of volunteers. A dedicated volunteer programme for date 15% of total drinking water in the Netherlands is 
beach patrols during the nesting season with training courses purified by 11.000 hectares of coastal dunes, which equals a 
for the volunteers and a website on which they can keep track turnover of more than 0.5 billion per year (KPMG, 2012b). 
of the status of each nest adds an awareness and scientific Even more substantial is the value of natural areas for 
component to these conservation efforts. recreational use and human wellbeing. Hiking and cycling, 
I - Update on biodiversity status, trends, and threats and implications for human well-being | 23

Figure 3. Importance of the Netherlands for North-western European populations of water bird species (CBS et al., 2013k).
I - Update on biodiversity status, trends, and threats and implications for human well-being | 25

Figure 5. Trends for national red list and non-red list species excl. wintering and migratory species (CBS et al., 2013).
Figure 6. Relative changes in the number of Red list species (CBS et al., 2013l). 
I - Update on biodiversity status, trends, and threats and implications for human well-being | 27

Figure 7. Trend in total numbers since 1975/76 of all water birds and of ducks, geese & swans and waders separately (CBS et al., 2013m). 
Figure 8. Trend of farmland birds in the Netherlands and Europe(CBS et al., 2013n).
I - Update on biodiversity status, trends, and threats and implications for human well-being | 29

Figure 10. Conservation status of habitat types and species (Annex II of the Habitat Directive) reported in 2013.
“Status and Trends of Caribbean Coral Reefs 1970-2012” was current erosion of genetic diversity needs to be minimized 
published in November 2013 (Jackson et al., 2013). This (see Aichi target 13). This section describes the situation 
report identifies the reefs of Bonaire, Curaçao and the concerning livestock and crops within the Kingdom of the 
Flower Garden Banks as retaining the highest percentage of Netherlands.
coral cover in all of the Caribbean, as well as showing the 
least decrease of coral cover over 40 years. The report found Netherlands
a strong correlation between the health of the coral reefs Livestock diversity
and the populations of grazing fish such as parrotfish. The position of the Netherlands as an innovative livestock 
Bonaire has listed parrotfish as a protected species. breeding country for pig, cattle, poultry and horses is 
known worldwide. A few highly productive international 
1.2.2 G enetic diversity of cultivated plants and breeds increasingly dominate the production of farm 
domesticated animals animal products across the world, like the Holstein Friesian 
Genetic diversity of cultivated plants and domesticated (USA) for milk production (fig. 12). As a result of this global 
animals is the result of natural selection processes and the trend, many local breeds are endangered. Essentially, this 
careful selection and inventive developments of farmers, homogenisation process is similar to the replacement of 
herders and fishers over millennia. This biodiversity has or the original species in wild biodiversity. 
had a huge socio-economically important impact. Many One globally dominant breed of sheep for meat production 
people’s food and livelihood security depend on the is of Dutch origin: ‘Texelaar’. Other products such as milk 
sustained management of various biological resources that from cattle, pig meat, chicken meat and eggs are only by a 
are important for food and agriculture. Nowadays only a few fraction produced by native Dutch breeds. The amount of 
highly productive breeds are used in agriculture, which sheep and goat milk is relatively low.
might be a risk when conditions change dramatically or a  To date there are 113 registered rare Dutch breeds of 11 
new disease becomes invasive. For increasing the resilience species (Hoving et al., 2013). Figure 13 shows the 2012 status 
of agricultural systems and for adaptation to changing of these rare breeds and an additional five non-rare Dutch 
conditions, the genetic diversity in cultivated plants and breeds (one sheep, goat, horse and two pig species). Some 
domesticated animals needs to be maintained and the 27% of these are regarded as critical, 55% endangered and 
I - Update on biodiversity status, trends, and threats and implications for human well-being | 31

Figure 12. The Holstein Frisian cattle (USA) started to dominate the milk production in the Netherlands some 30 years ago, causing native breeds like MRIJ, 
Fries-Hollands and Groninger Blaarkop to become rare (no data available for the period 2008-2010).The latter species has however always been rare. 
Source CGN.
4
10% vulnerable (source SZH ). The population size of 8% of 500 nature reserves in the Netherlands have made use of 
the breeds is regarded normal, though inbreeding even semi-wild breeds for grazing, including rare Dutch farm 
threatens half of them. If we specifically look at the trend animal breeds.
for rare breeds of cattle (trend from 2002-2011), horse 
(2002-2009), sheep and goat (both 2002-2012), it shows that Crop Diversity
39% is increasing, 29% is stable and 32% is decreasing As for livestock a few commercial crops dominate the 
(Jansen et al., 2013). production process. While five commodities (wheat, barley, 
maize, sugar beet and potato) show land coverage of over 
Many native Dutch farm animal breeds generally became 25.000 ha, more than 41 additional food and feed crops are 
rare as they lost their production function in agriculture to cultivated over an area of just over 100 ha. Since 1970, a 
other commercial breeds. Nowadays, their status and trend small number of crops have almost disappeared from 
increasingly depend on their popularity with hobbyists. production systems, including rye, oats, pulses, caraway, 
Unfortunately the number of (commercial) breed keepers is and fodder beets. The number of farms cultivating these 
also small. One important strategy to prevent further crops and the number of varieties offered in the market has 
declines is to come up with new functions for the breeds. decreased to a similar extent. Whereas this trend 
For instance the current slow-food movement using commenced in the 1970s, a final reduction has taken place 
regional products gives the opportunity to rehabilitate over the last decade. Substantial traditional crop diversity is 
some of the breeds’ former agricultural function. ‘Rarely however maintained in gardens, rather than on farms, and 
tasty’ is a contradictory sounding but popular slogan of the in-garden maintenance of traditional varieties has been 
Dutch Rare Breed Survival Trust (www.szh.nl). Also the shown to represent a robust conservation system. The 
grazing of nature reserves by native breeds of cattle, horses, genetic diversity of crops that have almost completely 
sheep and goats is sometimes a ‘newly’ created function. disappeared form the Dutch farming systems, is largely 
Native breeds are important from a cultural-historical point maintained in ex situ collections in the country and abroad 
of view and are often less vulnerable for less optimal (Min. LNV, 2008b). 
circumstances because they were not only bred to increase 
production. This makes them better adapted to specific Caribbean Netherlands
natural terrains and their grazing behaviour is important for The conservation of native breeds is not an issue of concern 
achieving specific biodiversity targets in nature and in the Caribbean Netherlands. The European Farm Animal 
5
landscape management. In the past 25 years approximately Information System (EFABIS) only shows three breeds for 
4 5 
Source: Dutch Rare Breed Survival Trust (SZH): www.szh.nl http://efabis.cgn.wur.nl/ 
I - Update on biodiversity status, trends, and threats and implications for human well-being | 33

Figure 14. The size of ecosystems increases since the implementation of the National Ecological Network in the 1990’s (van Veen et al., 2010).
Figure 15. Trend for the percentage of bottlenecks solved that were caused by national infrastructure (CBS et al., 2013f).
I - Update on biodiversity status, trends, and threats and implications for human well-being | 35

Figure 17. Environmental pressures in the Netherlands (CBS et al., 2012).
fragile ecosystems such as coral reefs, which are already Netherlands since 1900, most in urban regions (fig. 19). 
under stress, these additional stressors have the potential to Climate change is one of the factors which enable species to 
cause great harm. Overgrazing by roaming and/or feral settle in the Netherlands. 
livestock is not only a major cause of erosion and nutrients 
ending up in the sea, it also causes desertification by Caribbean Netherlands
preventing regeneration of the vegetation and recruitment Invasive species are one of the biggest threats to the fragile 
of trees that are essential as food sources for the endemic biodiversity of the Caribbean Netherlands, both on land and 
parrot and parakeet as well as other birds. at sea (Burg et al., 2012; Debrot et al., 2011b; Buurt en 
 Oil: The oil industry is an important industrial Debrot, 2011a; Buurt en Debrot, 2011b; Jongman et al., 
stakeholder in the Caribbean Netherlands. Oil 2010). Some of the obvious problematic species are Corallita 
transshipment facilities are found on Bonaire and Saint (Antigonon leptopus) and Donnagrass on Saint Eustatius and 
Eustatius and represent economically important industries. Saba and Rubber Vine (Cryptostegia grandiflora) and Neem Tree 
At the same time these industries entail a major risk to the (Azadirachta indica) on Bonaire (Debrot et al., 2011a). Burg et 
environment as well as to the tourism industries on which al. (2012) lists another 80 potentially invasive flora species.
the islands also depend heavily. Cleanups may be expensive  Most detrimental fauna species are mammals like goat, 
or impossible, whereas oil spills are frequent, and soils and Mongoose, cat and Black Rat. But small invasive species can 
beaches are contaminated with highly persistent oil and tar. also have a big impact. The native White Cedar (Tabebuia 
heterophylla) of Saba has become all but extinct due to a 
1.3.3 Invasive species plague of invasive insects (Debrot en Sybesma, 2000). 
Netherlands Less is known about exotic marine species, of which 
New water connections, international transport and trade many reach the area in the ballast water of ships. To date 
cause the introduction of new species in the Netherlands. only 27 species are known to occur in the waters around the 
The Danube-Rhine canal for instance connected the Danube Caribbean Netherlands, of which some can be called 
and Rhine flora and fauna. Nowadays, alien species invasive. Another 76 exotic species are known to occur in 
outnumber the native species in the large Dutch rivers. the Wider Caribbean region and may reach the Caribbean 
Native species still occur, and it is not clear yet to what Netherlands in time through the sea currents (Debrot et al., 
extent alien species are invasive and replace native ones. On 2011b). One of the most problematic species is the invasive 
land, at least 145 plant species have settled in the Lionfish (Pterois volitans miles) from the Indo-Pacific region. 
I - Update on biodiversity status, trends, and threats and implications for human well-being | 37

Figure 19. Exotic species in the Netherlands (CBS, et al., 2008ab, 2013gh). 
This species predates on young native reef fishes and as grazing populations are well controlled. 
there are no natural predators of the Lionfish it can have a 
big impact on the natural populations of herbivore fish and Caribbean Netherlands
indirectly on the presence of algae on the coral reefs. When Grazing by feral or free roaming animals (goats, sheep and 
the first Lionfish arrived in the waters of Bonaire, STINAPA cattle) is a serious problem on all islands of the Caribbean 
Bonaire, the local nature management organisation put a Netherlands. Even though it is illegal to let livestock roam 
control programme into place. Volunteers are trained to freely, this has become the accepted practice on all islands. 
become certified hunters and Lionfish may only be culled Aside from invasive species, overgrazing by livestock is the 
with a special, spring-loaded device, called an ELF single greatest threat to terrestrial biodiversity in the 
(Eliminate Lionfish). On other Dutch Caribbean islands the Caribbean Netherlands. It has been known to be an issue for 
regulations are less strict, but working just as well. The a long time. Overgrazing takes place in conservation areas 
control programmes that were put into action on Bonaire managed by the national parks organizations as well as in 
and Curaçao seem to have had an effect (León et al., in the public domain. It is easier to address in the areas 
prep.). Lionfish numbers are going down on both islands. managed by the national park organizations than on public 
However, control efforts have to be continuous from now lands. It has been effectively addressed on Curaçao in the 
on, since complete eradication of this invasive is out of the Christoffel park as well as on the islands of Klein Curaçao 
question. and Klein Bonaire.
1.3.4 Overgrazing 1.3.5 Climate change
Netherlands Netherlands
In the Netherlands semi-wild livestock breeds have been About half of the Netherlands lies below sea level. Though 
introduced to nature reserves for grazing purposes. the Netherlands are well known for their water 
Overgrazing is no serious threat in the Netherlands as the management, climate change induced sea level rise and 
I - Update on biodiversity status, trends, and threats and implications for human well-being | 39

Figure 21. Status and trend for the Cod stock (CBS et al., 2013q).
living and slow reproducing shark and ray species are also combination of other serious threats. These include the 
vulnerable; they are a by-catch of sea bottom fishery and deterioration of the coral reef habitat itself, particularly in 
their stocks been diminished. shallow waters where nursing areas among branching corals 
 The fact that commercial fish stocks show positive trends have completely disappeared. 
does not automatically implicate that the fishing industry is 
environmentally acceptable. Certain bottom trawls have a 
severe impact on vulnerable bottom fauna. Management 1.4 Impacts of the changes in  
measures are taken in marine Natura 2000-sites to reduce 
biodiversity for ecosystem services 
this impact, where necessary. Meanwhile continued 
innovation is required in order to reduce the footprint on and the socio-economic and 
the marine environment, also outside the Natura 2000 
cultural implications of these 
areas. 
impacts
Caribbean Netherlands
In the Caribbean Netherlands the impacts of overfishing are The policy and research on ecosystem services and the 
mainly within the Territorial waters close to the coast and impacts of declining biodiversity for society are quite new in 
often within the marine protected area boundaries. Within the Netherlands. Substantial efforts have been carried out to 
the EEZ overfishing is a problem on the Saba Bank where better understand its impact. TEEB studies have been carried 
traditional fishing targets breeding aggregations of out (see §1.1.2) and an indicator of the status and trends of 
groupers (Meesters et al., 2010), but a large part of the the main ecosystem services is currently being developed by 
fishing occurs within the Territorial waters of Saba. the Environmental Assessment Agency and partners. It is 
 Coral reef ecosystems are prone to overfishing and stock expected to be published mid-2014. 
collapse. Such stock collapse of large commercial reef fish 
stocks has taken place throughout the Caribbean Several separate studies on the services are available; such as 
Netherlands (e.g Meesters et al., 2010; Debrot and Criens, the influence of species rich field margins on pest insects. 
2005). Studies by IUCN on the reefs of Bonaire also point to The use of pesticides in the last century increased 
overfishing as a key threat to the reef ecosystem (IUCN, productivity and decreased the risks of crop failure to a level 
2011), especially since coral reef fish populations also face a ecosystem services alone cannot sustain. However, the use 
I - Update on biodiversity status, trends, and threats and implications for human well-being | 41

Figure 23. The perspectives for nature in the four 2040 visions if compared to 2010 (de Knegt, et al. 2011). 
2. Experiential nature: in this perspective nature  Plausible future scenarios are: more space for the big rivers, 
development and management are focused on restored tidal systems and fresh water-salt water gradients 
recreational use. in the Southwestern Delta, dynamic coastal management 
3. Functional nature: this perspective is about provisioning and gradual transition zones from land to water in the 
and regulating ecosystem services with a real economic IJsselmeer area.
worth and value to society. 
4.  Tailored nature: in this perspective people live and work 
surrounded by nature and enjoy their leisure time there. 
Improvement of environmental conditions is 
unnecessary.
These four visions of the future show that the Netherlands 
could look quite different in 2040, depending on which 
policy is pursued; the perspectives for nature can also be 
quite different. Figure 23 shows that the perspectives for 
nature will improve within the 2040 visions ‘Vital Nature’, 
‘Experiential Nature’ and ‘Functional Nature’ if compared to 
2010. Only for ‘Tailored Nature’ it will get slightly worse (de 
Knegt et al., 2011). These nature perspectives are however 
one-dimensional, ideal-typical visions of the future, 
intended to widen the scope of thinking about nature and 
the landscape. In practice, combinations will often be seen.
 The Nature Outlook 2010–2040 may be seen as a source of 
inspiration for the survey on policy options for the 
development of the Nature Ambition Great Waters 2050-
2100 in 2014 (Min. EZ, 2013g). The core of this policy survey 
is that natural processes get as much space as possible. This 
will lead to resilient and robust nature, which best 
conserves biodiversity. In many cases, this will be in synergy 
with measures for flood protection as well as providing 
opportunities for recreational experience and utilization. 
I - Update on biodiversity status, trends, and threats and implications for human well-being | 43

2.1 Biodiversity targets set by the  implementation of the Dutch Policy Memorandum Invasive 
Alien Species that was published and sent to the Parliament 
Netherlands 
in 2007. The policy, with the emphasis on prevention, is in 
This section describes the Dutch contribution to the CBD line with agreements made in the framework of the 
targets and the EU biodiversity strategy. The most important Convention of Biological Diversity and is directly related to 
biodiversity strategy plans, their targets and actions are target 5.
described in section 2.2.
Caribbean Netherlands
Netherlands The biodiversity targets for the Caribbean Netherlands are in 
The Convention on Biological Diversity provides the basis line with the international treaties, conventions and 
for the EU Biodiversity Strategy to 2020. Dutch biodiversity regional agreements which the Kingdom committed itself 
policy is in line with the EU strategy and CBD. In 2011 the EC to, as well as national laws in the field of nature and 
adopted a new and ambitious strategy to halt the loss of biodiversity in the Caribbean Netherlands. 
biodiversity and ecosystem services in the EU by 2020. This  The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 
strategy covers six main targets and 20 actions to help (NBSAP) for the Caribbean Netherlands only focus on those 
Europe reach its goal. The six targets concern: areas and species that are part of these international 
1. Full implementation of EU nature legislation to protect agreements. The NPP-2017 aims for a sustainable use of 
biodiversity. nature in the Caribbean islands, so that ecological systems 
2. Better protection for ecosystems, and more use of green and ecosystem services are conserved. The two targets 
infrastructure. concern:
3. More sustainable agriculture and forestry. •	 Mainstreaming of nature conservation and sustainable 
4. Better management of fish stocks. use in all sectors of society. 
5. Tighter controls on invasive alien species. •	 Conservation of biodiversity through improved planning  
6. A bigger EU contribution to averting global biodiversity and management of protected areas and species. 
loss. 
The focus of biodiversity protection in the Netherlands lies 
on the implementation and management of the EU Natura 2.2 Update of the NBSAP to  
2000-sites and the conservation of its Natura 2000-habitat 
incorporate these targets and to 
types and species. These sites are part of the National 
Ecological Network (NEN) which is due to be completed in serve as an effective instrument 
2027. Within this network, the focus lies on the 
for mainstreaming biodiversity 
implementation of the ecosystem approach, as the 
protection of habitat is essential for the conservation of This section provides a brief description of the targets and 
biodiversity as a whole. Outside the NEN, the government actions in the most important national biodiversity strategy 
sets targets to increase the conservation status of species and action plans. 
and habitats that depend on or are affected by agriculture.  
The national targets are presented in the Nature pact (Min. Netherlands
EL&I, 2013) and they are directly related to target 1-3 from The Netherlands have had a national biodiversity strategy 
the above strategy. The Nature Pact refers to an agreement and action plans for many decades. Important policy plans 
between the national government with the provinces, and were the Nature Policy Plan (Min. LNV, 1990) and “Nature for 
the provinces have translated this into agreements with people, people for nature: a policy document for nature, 
social partners. A measurable target is for example that forest and landscape in the 21st century” (Min. LNV, 2000). 
‘between 2011 and 2027 80.000 hectares new nature is Additional biodiversity initiatives have been addressed by 
developed to realise the NEN’. specific priority programmes such as “Biodiversity works: 
 The focus of ecosystem services protection lies on the for nature, for people, for ever: the biodiversity policy 
implementation and management of Natural Capital and programme of the Netherlands 2008-2011”. A Dutch vision 
sustainable production and consumption of fishery, forestry for nature is still under construction and will be presented 
and agriculture mostly outside the Netherlands. The to the public in April 2014. Meanwhile the parliament is 
national targets of this focus are presented in the Natural informed about the progress of the vision and the main 
Capital Agenda (Min. EZ & Min. I&M, 2013) and they are targets by the policy letter ‘Forward with nature policy - 
directly related to target 3, 4 and 6 from the above strategy. midterm review’ (Min. EZ, 2013d). These targets are:
A target of this strategy is: ‘By 2020, agricultural 1. To create a robust National Ecological Network (NEN).
management is sustainable in a such a way that biodiversity 2. Improve environmental conditions for species 
is preserved’. protection. 
 The control of invasive species relies on the 3. Regional approach to Agri-environmental management.
II - The national biodiversity strategy and action plan (NBSAP), its implementation, and the mainst | 45

implementation of the CBD in the Dutch Caribbean, while Netherlands
Debrot et al. (2011a) did an evaluation of the National The Aichi biodiversity targets have been elaborated by the 
Nature Policy Plan 2001-2005 (NPP-2005) for the former European Union in the EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2020. 
Netherlands Antilles. This was used as a starting point for The Netherlands is committed to the implementation of 
developing a Nature Policy Plan for the Caribbean this strategy and uses it as a framework for its national 
Netherlands. The evaluation revealed that limited capacity, biodiversity work. The main goals of the EU Strategy reflect 
funding and political support were the main bottlenecks for the priorities that have also been recognized by the Dutch 
implementation of NPP-2005. government: implementation of the Natura2000 network 
 The first Nature Policy Plan for the Caribbean Netherlands for protected areas, restoration of ecosystem services, 
was published in May 2013 (Min. EZ, 2013a) and covers the greening of agriculture and forestry, sustainable fisheries, 
period 2013 – 2017 (NPP-2017). It is intended to be updated management of invasive alien species, integration of 
every 5 years. The NPP-2017 has been developed with all biodiversity and trade and development cooperation.
relevant stakeholders, while essential budgets will be  Based on the global and European commitments the 
reserved. Nature management in the protected areas of all Netherlands has recently adopted a new priority agenda for 
six Caribbean islands within the Kingdom will be funded biodiversity, the ‘Natural Capital Agenda 2013’ 
from a trust fund, set-up by Dutch Caribbean Nature (’Uitvoeringsagenda Natuurlijk Kapitaal’; Min. EZ & Min. 
Alliance (DCNA). This trust fund is financially supported by I&M, 2013). The agenda intends to facilitate new and 
the Dutch Government. existing initiatives that relate to greening of consumption 
 The ambitious NPP-2017 covers two main targets and 32 and production patters, mapping the value of ecosystem 
strategic actions. Mainstreaming of nature conservation and services, and developing additional financial investments in 
sustainable use in all sectors of society is the first target. It biodiversity. Concrete schemes and initiatives include the 
concerns 17 strategic actions in the field of international, Platform Biodiversity, Ecosystems and Economics (a 
economic and juridical affairs, such as the development of partnership between government, private sector and 
guidelines and best practises for sustainable agriculture and NGO’s), TEEB studies and Green Deals. In this way the 
fisheries; it also covers sustainable use of biodiversity Netherlands will contribute to addressing some of the key 
according to the CBD-Access and Benefit Sharing. The other drivers of biodiversity loss and further integrate biodiversity 
target concerns the actual conservation of biodiversity goals into economic activities.
through improved planning and management of protected  The Dutch government has already taken several actions 
areas and species. It concerns 15 actions in the field of that are summarised in the policy letter ‘State of affairs 
management of protected areas and species; research and biodiversity policy’(Min EL&I, 2012a), for example:
monitoring to be able to assess the status and trends of •	 The Dutch government, several organisations of farmers, 
biodiversity; CEPA (communication, education and public small and medium enterprises (LTO, MKB, VNO-NCW) and 
awareness); and recovery and/or improvement of degraded the Dutch Butterfly Conservation organisation, at the 
ecosystems. It concerns actions like management of the beginning of 2011, signed some 150 Green Deals relating 
Saba Bank, implementation of a marine reserve for marine to energy, climate, water, raw materials, mobility, 
mammals and sharks and evaluation of the management of biodiversity, bio-based economy, construction and food.
Ramsar sites. •	 TEEB studies (The Economics of Ecosystems and 
 The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan Biodiversity) have been commissioned to understand the 
(NBSAP) for the Caribbean Netherlands is contained in the economic value of ecosystem services to government, 
Nature Policy Plan Caribbean Netherlands, which covers the business and civil society and by that to support the 
period 2013-2017 (NPP-2017). The NPP-2017 aims for a decision-making process for policy-making and large 
sustainable use of nature on the Caribbean islands, so that investment projects; guidelines for citizens, trade and 
ecological systems and ecosystem services are conserved. industry for working with biodiversity are available on the 
website www.biodiversity.nl.
•	 Initiative fair trade (Initiatief Duurzame Handel).
2.3 Actions taken to implement the  
2.3.1 Raising awareness 
Convention since the fourth 
During the International Year of Biodiversity 2010, a 
report and outcomes of these ‘Coalition 2010’ gathering over 200 companies, NGOs and 
local governments engaged in massive awareness-raising 
actions 
actions, in order to increase public awareness of the 
This section describes the most important policies, actions, importance of nature and their willingness to share 
funding and legislation taken to protect and preserve responsibility for its preservation. The over-all theme was 
biodiversity. twofold: ‘The Garden and The Fridge’, addressing care for 
nature as well as consumption and lifestyle. Ten regional 
II - The national biodiversity strategy and action plan (NBSAP), its implementation, and the mainst | 47

Pricing; and initiatives which integrate Natural Capital 
Present Codes of conduct
into business accounts (for example, by supporting the 
set-up of a system in biodiversity benchmarking between 
Nature Management
companies and industries in 2014). 
Responsible Forest Management
2.3.3  Reduce pollution form nitrogen deposition  
Association of Regional Water Authorities
by a national programmatic approach 
Drinking water companies
The ‘Programmatic Approach to Nitrogen’ 
(‘Programmatische Aanpak Stikstof, PAS) is the most 
Leisure Industry
important strategy to improve environmental conditions 
Construction and Development sector 
necessary for biodiversity protection in the Netherlands. The 
PAS is foreseen to be implemented in 2014 (Min. EZ, 2013f ). 
Foundation Pipelines route Southwest Netherlands
 A number of national and regional governments 
Groningen Seaports
cooperate in the PAS to achieve two goals near Natura 
2000-sites. Halting the loss of biodiversity due to nitrogen 
Port of Rotterdam
deposition, as well as ensuring its recovery. On one hand 
Provincial Infrastructure
this will be achieved by minimising nitrogen emissions, for 
instance by tightening the rules for building stables. On the 
Spatial planning and organisation of Municipalities
other hand, this will be achieved by implementing nature 
Municipal Greening
restoration measures such as additional vegetation 
management or improvement of the hydrology. As long as 
Federation of Surface Mining Industries
the overall nitrogen emissions decrease and the 
Rijkswaterstaat (manager main infrastructure facilities)
conservation status of species and habitats increases, there 
will be room for economic development. The restoration 
Foundation Soil management Krimpenerwaard
measures per site are assessed on its expected effectiveness 
Provincial Infrastructure
and are obliged to be implemented after that. 
Prorail (manager railroad system)
2.3.4  Legislation
The main laws for nature conservation in the Netherlands Table 1. Organisations and sectors with a Code of Conduct. 
are the 1998 Nature
 Conservation Act (‘Natuurbeschermingswet’) and the Flora and Fauna Act and Codes of conduct 
Flora and Fauna Act (‘Flora en fauna wet’). Both are the The Dutch Flora and Fauna Act became active in 2002 and it 
Dutch interpretation of the European Birds and Habitats protects about 500 plants and animals living in the wild. 
Directives. The 1998 Nature Conservation Act focuses on the The international treaties, conventions etc. are translated 
preservation of nature areas, while the Flora and Fauna Act into this law. Dispensation from the Flora and Fauna Act or 
focuses on the protection of plant and animal species. an All-in one Permit for Physical Aspects 
 The Nature Conservation Act provides for the designation (Omgevingsvergunning) is often necessary to carry out work 
of nature areas of national or international importance which may influence protected species. Activities are 
(Natura 2000 sites). The Act regulates which activities are eligible for an exemption in certain circumstances. Two 
allowed in protected nature areas and under which types of exemption exist: a general exemption for common 
conditions. A permit must be obtained for activities that species and an exemption on condition that activities are 
may damage natural values and measures to mitigate or carried out in accordance with an approved code of conduct 
compensate the damage are obliged. The act also sets out (for rarer species). When activities may influence protected 
requirements for national reporting on nature and species or their nesting, rest or feeding places, 
biodiversity and its policy, which is published once every compensation might be in order before dispensation is 
two years by the Environmental Assessment Agency in the given. The code of conduct states how to prevent or 
‘Assessment of the Living Environment’ (‘Balans van de minimize damage to protected plants and animals during 
Leefomgeving’). the course of recurring management work. Sectors, 
organizations or trade associations may draw up a code of 
conduct themselves, which must then be approved by the 
Minister of Economic Affairs (EZ). To date codes of conduct 
have been approved for around 20 municipalities and a 
wide range of organizations and sectors (table 1).
 Article 7 of the Flora and Fauna Act says that the 
government should make red lists of species that are 
II - The national biodiversity strategy and action plan (NBSAP), its implementation, and the mainst | 49

Figure 24. Increasing area used for organic farming in the Netherlands (source CBS et al., 2013e).
agricultural sector to produce sufficient and healthy food at organic farmland, but the frequent weeding subsequently 
acceptable prices, but this also has to be done in attractive destroyed a large proportion of them (Kragten & de Snoo, 
rural area that allow people to enjoy recreate pursuits and to 2007).
value nature (Wageningen UR, 2008). This changing attitude The recent establishment of ‘Veldleeuwerik’, a coalition of 
is among others reflected in an increasing demand for farmers, biological seeds breeding companies and 
organic food products and consequently an increasing area Integrated Pest Management (IPM) specialists, farm sector 
of land used for organic farming (fig. 24). organisations, agri-businesses like Heineken Beer and 
The Dutch government regards organic agriculture as a provincial authorities aiming to promote sustainable 
good example of sustainable production and it is actively agriculture, is considered a break through and an example 
stimulating the growth of a professional organic agriculture of what can be accomplished in a short period of time in 
sector (Wageningen UR, 2008). The Ministry of Economic terms of increasing production and productivity when 
Affairs assigned the Skal foundation as the certification and biological sub-sector players join forces. This can also create 
inspection body for organic production. The European logo a new export market e.g. for biological seed breeding 
for organic products was introduced in July 2010. In 2012 companies and IPM specialists.
48.4 thousand hectares of land were used for organic 
farming which is still only 2.6% of the total land used within Consumption
the agricultural sector (CBS et al., 2013e). As yet the Changing the consumption pattern is the best solution to 
principles of organic farming (SKAL eco label) include no decrease the land-use needed for the average Dutch person’s 
targets or measures to support biodiversity conservation, in diet. Halving the consumption of meat and dairy products 
contrast to other labels like that of the Forest Stewardship and less wastage of food in combination with more efficient 
6
Council (FSC ). Organic farming on average shows small food production (and improved animal welfare) would for 
positive effects on a number of individual flora and fauna instance result in > 30% less land-use compared to 2010 
species but the results are ambiguous. So, for example, (PBL, 2013). The recent vision of the government in 
more Lapwing nests could for instance be observed in cooperation with the agrifood sector is the Agenda for Food 
Sustainability for the period 2013 - 2016 (Min EZ, 2013j). 
There are four distinct aims set out in the agenda: 
6 
FSC principle 6: “Forest management shall conserve biological 
1. Increasing the level of sustainability in the large Dutch 
diversity and its associated values, water resources, soils, and unique 
commodities and product chains in a broad sense and 
and fragile ecosystems and landscapes, and, by so doing, maintain 
with special attention to. 
the ecological functions and the integrity of the forest.”
II - The national biodiversity strategy and action plan (NBSAP), its implementation, and the mainst | 51

the circulation of illegally logged wood in the European with sufficient offspring. Central to this fishery 
Union the EU Timber Regulation (EUTR) came into effect.  management scheme are the so-called precautionary 
In March 2013 the EU Timber Regulation (EUTR) came into reference points and biological limits and Maximum 
effect, which prohibits placing illegally harvested timber Sustainable Yield (MSY). The catches by the major marine 
(products) on the EU market. Both timber and timber fisheries are regulated with multi annual plans, detailing 
products produced in the EU and those imported from what objectives should be achieved and providing harvest 
outside are covered by this legislation. The Food and control rules. Most of the commercial stocks in the North 
Consumer product safety authority coordinates the Sea have recovered or are recovering after a period of 
application of the EUTR in the Netherlands. The overfishing in the 1980s and 90s, due to restrictions in 
Netherlands still needs to ensure at national and EU level catching opportunities (Total Allowable Catches and effort), 
that imported FSC and PEFC certified timber can enter a reduction in fleet capacity, technical measures and 
‘green lane’ under the EUTR to prevent that timber innovation. Not only have spawning stocks increased, 
harvesting and trading companies have to go through fishing pressure has decreased dramatically. However, there 
elaborate protocols twice. The round tables for soy and are some unregulated species such as Seabass that give 
palm oil, initiated by the Dutch Trade Initiative, have cause for concern and which call for urgent measures. 
contributed to a decreasing rate of deforestation in tropical Vulnerable long lived shark and ray species, a by-catch of sea 
countries, but a lot still needs to be done in order to prevent bottom fishery, have declined and their stocks have been 
massive conversion of tropical forests and peat land. diminished. They were a by-catch of sea bottom fishery. 
 Furthermore the Netherlands support the EU FLEGT  The next CFP will come into force in 2014 and it builds on 
action plan. A study will be conducted on the effect of the measures already taken under the former CFP. New 
pricing of the EU wood regulation on certified and elements have been introduced such as a more regionalized 
non-certified sustainable wood. The government also approach to management and an obligation to land all 
explores the option for a sustainable wood chain with catches of regulated fish species. Furthermore, the objective 
important suppliers of wood outside the EU (Malaysia, is to achieve the Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY) by 2015 
Indonesia, Brazil, Russia). The European Sustainable where possible, but not later than 2020 for all other stocks. 
Tropical Timber Coalition has been initiated as a prelude to This is in accordance with, and even more ambitious than 
a global Round Table that will be implemented by 2016 at the commitment from the UN World Summit on 
the latest (Min EZ & Min. I&M, 2013). Sustainable Development (Johannesburg 2002). Forbidding 
 In the last four years the Netherlands also played an of discards and the landing requirement will be one of the 
important role in debates around the negative pillars of the new sustainable fisheries policy in the 
environmental and social effects, particularly in (sub-) Netherlands. The landing obligation should stimulate 
tropical countries, of the EU climate mitigation policies to fishermen to fish more selectively and avoid unwanted 
blend fossil fuels and biofuels. One effect is further land use by-catches as much as possible. In addition, the Dutch 
change resulting in more damage to forest ecosystems and Government stimulates innovations which are aimed at 
more loss of biodiversity. The allocation of large stretches of making the fishing industry more sustainable. Development 
land to biofuel investors also had negative social effects and of fishing with pulse beams for instance, compared to chain 
in several countries land allocated to investors for the beams is one of those innovations. 
production of (for example) Jatropha was located at least  The Marine Strategy Framework Directive obliges EU 
partially in national parks. Dutch and local NGO’s and member states to adopt a marine strategy aimed at the 
knowledge institutes were also supported by the Dutch protection, conservation and restoration of the marine 
government to conduct research in the field of biofuels, to environment, thereby guaranteeing its sustainable use.  
pilot new biofuel production options and related The target of the framework is to reach good environmental 
technology such as cooking devices based on biofuels, and status by 2020.
to raise awareness around positive and negative effects of 
biofuels. Consumption
Supermarkets have an important contribution to make in 
2.4.3 Fisheries relation to increasing the sustainability of fisheries. to The 
Coastal and inland bivalve, lobster, shrimp and fresh water aim was for them to only sell fish having a MSC label by 2011 
species fisheries are managed nationally, whilst marine (van Oostrum, 2010). This target has not been met, but the 
fisheries fall under the EU Common Fisheries Policy (CFP). consumer spending on MSC fish increased by 17,3 % 
between 2010 and 2011 (Fig. 26 ; Min. EL&I 2012). 
Production
The CFP in 2002 was based on the precautionary principle 2.4.4 Aquaculture
and the ecosystem approach. It was developed with the aim The Blue Shell Mussel (Mytilus edulis) culture is, with 56.6 
of preventing overfishing and to ensure healthy fish stocks million kilograms of total landings in 2010/2011, the main 
II - The national biodiversity strategy and action plan (NBSAP), its implementation, and the mainst | 53

Figure 27. Import, export and consumption of wood and fish products and raw materials in the Netherlands (PB,L 2013b). 
the production of raw materials – an important contribution companies are off setting their remaining emissions within 
is given to the sustainable use of biodiversity and the their coffee value chain, enabling an Ethiopian coffee 
reduction of the Dutch Ecological Footprint. This footprint farmers cooperative to provide loans to households that 
is about three times the size of the Netherlands (Van want to buy a fuel wood saving stove. This can lead to more 
Oorschot et al. 2012). The policy of the Dutch government is shadow trees in small scale coffee plantations, which can 
committed to reduce the ecological effects and to stimulate have a positive effect on biodiversity. The development of a 
a more efficient production. Although it will be difficult for climate neutral fair coffee value chain is supported by the 
a strongly urbanised country like the Netherlands to bring Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs, ICCO (‘Interkerkelijke 
down its footprint, serious efforts are underway to limit it as Organisatie voor Ontwikkelingssamenwerking’) Fair 
much as possible. This happens through the Sustainable Climate and by the Horn of Africa Regional Environment 
Trade Initiative (IDH) together with the International Centre in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. 
Finance Corporation (IFC), but also through direct 
agreements between businesses and social organisations. Chances for entrepreneurs and individuals
 Impacts on local ecosystems will be integrated within The Platform Biodiversiteit, Ecosystemen en Economie 
such agreements. The use of certification, such as those for (BEE) drafted an implementation agenda aiming at the 
fair trade coffee and FSC timber products, and the stimulation of innovative projects and to develop a 
effectiveness of ecosystem use receives specific attention, knowledge and innovation agenda. The government 
which is also one the priorities of the Natural Capital provides resources for this, among others for a subsidy 
Agenda (Min. EZ & Min. I&M, 2013). scheme. The goal of the scheme is to stimulate businesses 
 The Dutch Max Havelaar Foundation, that started to incorporate No Net Loss in their strategy and their 
Fairtrade labelling 25 years ago on a container of coffee, is management. This means concrete management 
now working with Dutch coffee roasters to limit their CO2 adjustments which aim at conservation, good management 
emissions. This is done via greater energy efficiency and and recovery of ecosystems. The government supports the 
shifts to renewable energy sources. In addition, the initiatives of nature managers, entrepreneurs and 
II - The national biodiversity strategy and action plan (NBSAP), its implementation, and the mainst | 55

as climate change and protection from flooding. An Netherlands Antilles. It listed a total of 47 policy goals and 
elaboration of this strategy is the policy survey ‘Nature 61 action points for the period 2001-2005. Of these 31 were 
ambitions for the Great Waters’ (Min. EZ, 2013g) which achieved to a high degree of completion between 2001 and 
describes the policy options leading up to 2050. 2010, notwithstanding the serious and chronic lack of both 
2. Species conservation through improvement of living  funds and manpower. While much has been achieved in 
conditions: In this track the main ambition is to allow terms of policy development and legal frameworks in those 
and give room to natural processes as this will ensure the 10 years, rapid global change has meant that nature 
long term preservation and development of landscapes management during the planning period 2013-2017 would 
and ecosystems. Target species will eventually return once have to confront an increasingly rapid succession of major 
their needs for aspects like space, water and ecological problems such as coral bleaching, hurricane 
environmental conditions have been met. The recent impacts, and invasive species.
return of breeding White-tailed eagles indicates that this  The evaluation showed that policy development during 
also works in a densely populated country like the the past 10 years had suffered significantly from challenges 
Netherlands. The policy document ‘Nature ambitions for in terms of both capacity and funding, as well as in 
the big waters’ (Min. EZ, 2013g) can again be seen as an decision-making. For less controversial action points such 
elaboration of this strategy. as “reporting”, drawing up “plans”, doing “research” and 
3. Agricultural nature conservation: regions become “education”, it was the lack of capacity and funding that 
responsible for a more natural agriculture: In this track were indicated in particular as the main problems. In 
the need for a drastic revision of agricultural nature contrast, the more controversial topics regarding “rules and 
management will be delivered through the introduction regulations”, “cooperation”, and “financial instruments” 
of collectives of farmers and other stakeholders in the largely failed to be achieved due to problems in the decision 
area. The combination of ecosystem services such as pest making process.
control, climate adaptation, water purification or an  Several main topics that needed attention were identified 
aesthetically improved landscape for recreation and in the new NPP-2017. This plan needs to meet standard and 
tourism will be supported. basic policy, information and management needs and also 
4.  Mainstreaming nature for the benefit of society and the has to accommodate the latest conceptual developments 
economy: In this track the continuity of nature policy will and the pressing realities of global change and alien species 
be achieved through a more emphatic public invasions. Notable is that a large number of new and serious 
responsibility for nature, new social arrangements and a threats have come to the forefront since the NPP-2005 was 
better connection between costs and benefits of nature. set out 10 years before.
Nature and the economy need each other; a fact which  Because the diverse, colourful and unique natural 
provides the basis for policy documents like the Natural ecosystems of the Caribbean Netherlands also represent the 
Capital Agenda (Min. EZ & Min. I&M, 2013) and Green single most important local economic resource on which to 
growth (Min. EZ, 2013c). Many initiatives have already build long-term prosperity of the inhabitants of these 
been implemented, like the so-called Green tables in islands, the NPP-2017 needs to be recognized as much more 
which multi-stakeholder dialogues result in new than simply a way to protect nature and to avert ecological 
investments, intentions and action plans for nature crisis. It is in fact a key policy tool by which to actively 
conservation. safeguard and create economic well-being and opportunity 
5.  Utilising the self-organising ability of society: In this track for these islands (Debrot et al., 2011a). 
government aims to make better use and support 
initiatives in society. Examples are the policy programs 
Doing Green (Groen Doen, Min. EL&I, 2012b), Nature and 
Environmental Education, Duurzaam Door (Min. EZ, 
2013e), Sustainable Trading Initiative (“IDH, Initiatief 
Duurzame Handel) and Green Deals with businesses.
Caribbean Netherlands
The National Nature Policy Plan 2001-2005 (NPP-2005) and 
its level of implementation was assessed as a first step 
towards a new Nature Policy Plan for the Caribbean 
Netherlands (NPP-2017). The purpose of this evaluation was 
to determine which action points were still current after 10 
years and to identify new developments to be aware of when 
setting goals and strategies for the new NPP-2017. The 
NPP-2005 was the first formal nature policy plan of the 
II - The national biodiversity strategy and action plan (NBSAP), its implementation, and the mainst | 57

3.1 Progress made towards the  focuses on biodiversity and ecosystems as part of wider 
sustainability and business policies. In addition, the 
implementation of the Strategic 
Platform on Business, Ecosystems and Economy founded by 
Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 IUCN and the Confederation of Netherlands Industry and 
Employers (VNO-NCW) also implements an awareness-
and it’s Aichi Biodiversity Targets? 
raising program to stimulate companies to take action. The 
This chapter analyses the progress made towards each of the list of action perspectives is expanding and more and more 
2020 targets of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 economic sectors become involved (including e.g. the 
by using the information from part I, status and trends in fashion and building industry).
biodiversity, and main threats, and part II, the national 
biodiversity strategy and action plan and the mainstreaming Most people in the Netherlands are aware of biodiversity in 
of biodiversity. This chapter refers to the quantitative their surrounding area and carry out low threshold activities 
indicators presented in part I and II and the national to maintain it (like feeding the birds during winter). Dutch 
policies described in part II. An overview table of goals, NGO’s are very successful in organising activities to increase 
targets, action plans, indicators, the progress made and public awareness and to involve citizens in their activities. 
their reference in the text can be found in the appendix. The The number of volunteers in nature management, surveys 
Conference of the Parties (COP) hasn’t formulated and monitoring, and education is increasing. However, the 
indicators yet for the Aichi Biodiversity targets. This will number of passive members contributing financially is 
probably happen at COP 12 in October 2014 or at a later decreasing, probably due to the economic crisis. In 
stage. In order to give as much consideration as possible to addition, the information provided under §1.1.1 illustrates 
the future indicators, we selected those possible indicators the increasing awareness of biodiversity conservation in the 
proposed by the Quick guides to the Aichi Biodiversity Netherlands. On the other hand, a growing number of 
Targets (CBD 2012) of which sufficient data was available and people think that nature should not be among the four top 
presented them in part I and II. Although there are officially priorities for the Dutch government. The economic crisis 
no indicators yet linked specifically to the Aichi targets, the and the governmental financial cuts are at the top of public 
indicators selected show that Dutch biodiversity policy is priorities. 
active in relation to all of the targets. The Netherlands has always had active programmes at all 
levels of government to support awareness raising and 
3.1.1 Strategic G oal A: Address the underlying communication on biodiversity and nature. Recently, the 
causes of biodiversity loss by mainstreaming present government has taken several new steps to increase 
biodiversity across government and society the awareness and involvement of the Dutch government 
Four Aichi targets have been formulated to achieve strategic (see §2.3.1) and is planning to involve citizens, business and 
goal A: industry (§2.1; Min EZ, 2013d; Min. EZ, 2013e). It is difficult 
1. Awareness increased. to assess whether Aichi-target 1 has been achieved as SMART 
2. Biodiversity values integrated. goals were not formulated. Based on the current status and 
3. Incentives reformed. positive trend of biodiversity awareness in the Netherlands 
4. Sustainable consumption and production. (see §1.1.1) and the on-going initiatives in relation to this 
matter, it can at least be concluded that the awareness is 
Aichi target 1. Awareness increased relatively high and still increasing. 
By 2020, at the latest, people are aware of the values of 
biodiversity and the steps they can take to conserve and use it Caribbean Netherlands
sustainably. On each of the islands of the Caribbean Netherlands the 
Protected Areas management organizations have dedicated 
Netherlands CEPA staff and active programs to educate in particular 
Many Communication, Education and Public Awareness youth about nature of the island. Other non-governmental 
(CEPA) activities in relation to the awareness of biodiversity not-for-profit organisations specifically address sea turtles 
values, its conservation and sustainable use have been and the endemic Bonairean parrot. On Saba and on Bonaire 
initiated and are on-going (www.biodiversiteit.nl). The in particular there is a general awareness among the 
Government increasingly delegates the responsibility for population of the importance of natural resources and the 
awareness raising to NGOs, private parties and businesses. need to use them sustainably. There is still a need however, 
Businesses take more and more responsibility for this to show what sustainability entails and to promote 
matter, for instance through the initiative ‘Leaders for sustainable projects. The Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs 
Nature’. This is the IUCN NL business network of twenty is working with WNF on a Sustainable Bonaire project, 
multinationals and major Dutch enterprises working organizing sustainability fairs to showcase various 
together on greening the global economy. The network sustainability efforts and initiatives, both from the private 
III - Progress towards the 2015 and 2020 Aichi Biodiversity Targets and contributions to the releva | 59

Curacao: A few small studies provide partial assessments of (PBL 2011a). The tax break on red diesel was abolished on 1 
the economic value of biodiversity and parks but no January 2013 with the exception of ships other than 
integrated assessment has been made. recreational vessels. In addition, negative impacts from the 
Saint Maarten: Some preliminary assessments of the policy on renewable energy will be minimised through the 
economic value of biodiversity are available (Bervoets, 2010) application of sustainability criteria.
but no integrative or extensive studies are available. There  Besides these existing harmful incentives there are also a 
has been little effort to integrate tourism and biodiversity, few new incentives harmful for biodiversity. The European 
so it is a priority that this receives attention in the various Commission and a majority of European Agriculture 
policy plans that the ministries are working on at present. Ministers for instance are now looking to gradually 
dismantle the European milk quota system by 2015. This will 
Aichi target 3. Incentives reformed further increase agricultural production in the Netherlands 
By 2020, at the latest, incentives, including subsidies, harmful to and because there is a negative relationship between an 
biodiversity are eliminated, phased out or reformed in order to increase of agricultural production and biodiversity (Kleijn, 
minimize or avoid negative impacts, and positive incentives for 2013) it is expected to have a negative impact on biodiversity 
the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity are if no compensation or mitigation measures are taken. The 
developed and applied, consistent and in harmony with the Dutch manure policy will be strengthened to mitigate the 
Convention and other relevant international obligations, taking effects of an increase of agricultural production. 
into account national socio economic conditions. Considering the above, the progress in relation to the 
Aichi-target 3 is limited due to positive and negative 
Netherlands developments regarding rules and regulations. 
The Netherlands have a relatively green tax system. In 2011 
green taxes contributed almost 14% to the total tax revenue Caribbean Netherlands
of the Netherlands. The revenues from green taxes have There has been no concrete reform of incentives to date. 
more than doubled since the late eighties (CBS et al, 2013a). However, the Nature Policy Plan for the Caribbean 
In the policy note ‘Green Growth: for a strong, sustainable Netherlands 2013-2017 (Min. EZ, 2013a) aims at 
economy’ (Min. EZ, 2013c) the government aims for smart mainstreaming of nature conservation and sustainable use 
use of market incentives. Prices of goods and services in all sectors of society, such as the support for development 
should increasingly reflect the external impacts of of sustainable agriculture on the islands. This will require 
production and consumption on nature and the the reform of incentives harmful for biodiversity. 
environment. A smart combination of pricing (for example 
in taxation or the Emission Trading Scheme, ETS), Aruba, Curacao and Saint Maarten
innovation policy and selective public procurement will Aruba: No incentives are in place to stem or halt biodiversity 
promote more sustainable production and will create loss.
markets for sustainable products and services. Curacao: No arrangements or incentives in place to help stem 
 The Netherlands give a high priority to greening of the EU biodiversity loss.
common policies on agriculture and fisheries. This should Saint. Maarten: No development to report.
eliminate, phase out or reform incentives that are harmful 
to biodiversity, while positive incentives are developed and Aichi Target 4. Sustainable consumption and production
applied. Time will show if this strategy has been effective. By 2020, at the latest, Governments, business and stakeholders 
However, besides positive incentives like these there are at all levels have taken steps to achieve or have implemented 
also environmentally harmful subsidies or tax exemptions plans for sustainable production and consumption and have 
that have an unintended negative effect on nature and the kept the impacts of use of natural resources well within safe 
environment. Abolishing these environmentally harmful ecological limits.
subsidies could achieve substantial savings while aiding the 
development of a cleaner environment. In the Netherlands Netherlands
in 2010, large environmentally harmful subsidies were Aichi-target 4 is fundamental for achieving other Aichi-
found particularly in the energy, transport and agricultural targets, while it’s also the basis for the policy strategy on 
sectors, representing between 5 and 10 billion euros (PBL, biodiversity. The information under §2.4 on the 
2011a). The Dutch Government could abolish certain mainstreaming of biodiversity illustrates that a lot has been 
environmentally harmful subsidies at a national level, but achieved in relation to consumption and production within 
for competition reasons this would require agreements at a relevant sectors like agriculture, forestry, fisheries and 
European or global scale. Examples are subsidies and tax aquaculture. The Natural Capital Agenda is aimed at 
breaks related to delivery vans, red diesel (used in forestry, sustainable agriculture, fisheries and forestry by 2020 (§2.1). 
agriculture, mobile machinery, railways, inland navigation  In addition the food retail and foodservice companies 
and heating) and the low VAT tariffs on meat, dairy and fish invest heavily in sustainability. A multinational company 
III - Progress towards the 2015 and 2020 Aichi Biodiversity Targets and contributions to the releva | 61

 Habitat loss by degradation has been significantly of fisheries on stocks, species and ecosystems are within safe 
reduced, mainly due to improvement of the environmental ecological limits.
conditions (§1.3.3) and restoration measurements taken by 
nature management organisations. However, ecosystems Netherlands
like heath and the habitats of meadow birds, such as Limosa For most of the important commercial fish, the stocks are 
limosa, on farmland did not improve and are continuing to currently within safe biological limits (see §1.3.7). However, 
degrade (fig. 7). Many areas still suffer from a combination not all effects of unsustainable fishery have been restored. 
of too much nitrogen deposition and desiccation. Vulnerable long lived shark and ray species are still critically 
Reasonable progress has been made on all aspects of endangered or threatened. The Netherlands are currently 
Aichi-target 5. Progress is on-going but significant reduction preparing a recovery action plan, in the light of the EU 
of degraded areas depends on further improvements, Marine Strategy Framework Directive (§2.4.3). Some fishing 
mainly in the agricultural sector. techniques still have a considerable environmental 
footprint. For instance, the impact of beam trawls with 
Caribbean Netherlands tickler chains on vulnerable habitats such as reefs. (§1.3.7 
Bonaire and Saint Eustatius each have zoning regulations and § 2.4.3). The European Union is responsible for policies 
identifying conservation areas and prohibiting any for management of marine living resources: Common 
development in such areas. Both islands have also Fishery Policy (CFP). The new CFP will enter into force in 
embarked on plans to reduce the serious degradation from 2014 (§2.4.3). It applies to fishing by EU vessels in 
overgrazing by roaming livestock. Saba has not yet international waters and in territorial waters of third 
implemented a zoning plan but has limited development to countries, unless agreements with the third country say 
a maximum altitude, safeguarding most of the natural areas otherwise. Furthermore, the Natural Capital Agenda is also 
from degradation. It has also embarked on a program to aiming to achieve sustainable fisheries by 2020 (par 2.1).
reduce the number of roaming goats. Fragmentation of  In addition to that the Netherlands Government 
habitat is not an issue in the Caribbean Netherlands. stimulates (technical) innovations which aim at more 
Reasonable progress has been made on Aichi target 5. sustainable fisheries, while management plans for marine 
Natura 2000 sites are currently being developed to conserve 
Aruba, Curacao and Saint Maarten marine biodiversity (for measures for shell fish, such as 
Aruba: Physical Development Policy 2009 addresses among cockles and mussels, see §3.1.10). A pilot action is foreseen 
other urban development and nature conservation areas, in 2015 to bring back shell banks in one of the protected 
but the policy has yet to be implemented. The legal sites, in order to restore biodiversity and the nursery 
designation of Arikok National Park as protected habitat by function for fish species (Min. EZ & Min. I&M, 2013). In 2016 
Ministerial decree in 2000 represents a major achievement there will be a complete ban on bottom trawling in the 
towards habitat protection. However, since then no coastal Natura 2000 sites of the North Sea Coastal Zone and 
additional areas have received legal protection, including Vlakte van de Raan, while shrimp fishing operations will be 
several internationally recognized Important Bird Areas limited (VIBEG agreement).
(Delnevo, 2008). There is also no marine park,  Reasonable progress has been made on Aichi-target 6. 
notwithstanding the existence of a government funded Further progress depends to a great extent on the 
Aruba Marine Park Foundation since 2010. implementation of the CFP from 2014 onwards. 
Curacao: This goal can be considered reached for the 
terrestrial ecosystem thanks to the 1997 land-use and zoning Caribbean Netherlands
law but not in the marine or coastal environment where Since 2011 the biodiversity and fisheries resources of the 
development and user pressures continue to grow. waters surrounding the islands of the Caribbean 
Saint Maarten: Habitat loss has continued at an alarming Netherlands, from the outer borders of the marine 
pace. Reducing or stopping it depends on the protected areas surrounding the islands to the outer borders 
implementation of a new zoning law. Reasonable progress of the Exclusive Economic Zone, are being jointly managed 
has been made because several rounds of public hearings through a Memorandum of Cooperation (MoC) between the 
already having taken place. islands and the Netherlands. Fisheries monitoring programs 
have been initiated on the Saba Bank, Saint Eustatius and 
Aichi target 6. Sustainable management of marine living resources Bonaire to develop effective ecosystem-based management. 
By 2020, all fish and invertebrate stocks and aquatic plants are Reasonable progress has been made on this target. 
managed and harvested sustainably, legally and applying 
ecosystem based approaches, so that overfishing is avoided, Aruba, Curacao and Saint Maarten
recovery plans and measures are in place for all depleted Aruba: Aruba actively contributed to a joint EEZ management 
species, fisheries have no significant adverse impacts on plan funded and endorsed by the Ministry of Economic 
threatened species and vulnerable ecosystems and the impacts Affairs (Meesters et al., 2010). Aruba also has some fisheries 
III - Progress towards the 2015 and 2020 Aichi Biodiversity Targets and contributions to the releva | 63

regarding bee health. Another focal point concerns marine Aichi target 9. Invasive alien species prevented and controlled
litter and a range of concrete actions will be taken, in By 2020, invasive alien species and pathways are identified and 
cooperation with parties like the EU Environment Council, prioritized, priority species are controlled or eradicated and 
IMO and UNEP, to reduce this problem (Min EZ, 2013). The measures are in place to manage pathways to prevent their 
Dutch government and the provincial governments prepare introduction and establishment.
the Programmatic Approach Nitrogen (PAS) to reduce this 
pollution, mainly caused by agriculture (§2.3.3). On one Netherlands
hand measures are taken to reduce nitrogen emissions, for The number of alien species in the Netherlands is still 
instance by tightening the rules for building stables. On the increasing (§1.3.4). Recognizing the increasingly serious 
other hand, nature restoration measures are taken to problem of invasive alien species in Europe, in September 
mitigate the effects on biodiversity such as additional 2013 the European Commission published a dedicated 
vegetation management or improvement of the hydrology. legislative instrument (regulation) on Invasive Alien Species 
Also, member states of the EU are obliged to renew their (IAS). The Netherlands support this initiative as it is a typical 
action programme under the Nitrates Directive (ND; cross-border problem. 
91/676/EEG) every four years . The Nitrates Directive aims to  In October 2007, the Dutch Policy Memorandum Invasive 
prevent or decrease water pollution caused by nitrates from Alien Species was published and sent to Parliament. The 
agricultural sources. The renewed (5th) Dutch action policy, with an emphasis on prevention, is in line with 
programme will become effective in the beginning of 2014. agreements made in the framework of the Convention of 
 This programme aims to establish, on average, Biological Diversity (three-stage hierarchical approach). The 
equilibrium fertilisation as regards phosphate, and aims to Netherlands Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority 
achieve, on average, the target value of 50 mg/l in (NVWA) is the central coordinating authority when it comes 
groundwater in all areas of the country. Thus, the to the implementation of many elements of the IAS policy 
programme will also contribute to the achievement of in the Netherlands. An annual budget is available to carry 
Water Framework Directive (WFD) goals. However, to out the tasks. The most important task of the NVWA is to 
actually achieve these goals, an intensified effort is advise the competent ministry on the risks of introduction, 
necessary. The WFD River Basin Management Plans which establishment and spreading of IAS and feasible 
will be established in 2015 are the framework for this effort. management options/ tools to be taken against IAS. NVWA 
In this respect, it is relevant that under Rural Development is also assigned the following tasks: detection and 
Plan 3 (RDP3), a significant sum of money will be set aside monitoring, risk assessment, alien hotline, creating public 
to help achieve ND and WFD goals. awareness and coordinating eradication campaigns.
 The Dutch Flora and Fauna Act prohibits the release of 
Caribbean Netherlands animal and plant species in the wild as well as prohibiting 
A sewerage system and a sewage treatment plant have been the possession and trade of certain alien species. The law 
put in place on Bonaire that will significantly reduce makes it possible to act if invasive alien species are 
nutrients from wastewater from reaching the coral reef. A introduced. 
newly passed environmental law will regulate small scale  Control and eradication of invasive alien species is much 
pollution on the islands as well as the larger scale more difficult in the water than on land, which emphasizes 
operations of the oil transhipment industry. With these new the need for prevention. In order to prevent the 
regulations Aichi reasonable progress has been made on introduction of marine alien species via the ballast water of 
target 8. ships, in 2010 the Netherlands signed the International 
Convention for the Control and Management of Ships’ 
Aruba, Curacao and Saint Maarten Ballast Water and Sediments (BWM) set up by the 
Aruba: Hotel wastewater has been treated at the Bubali lake International Maritime Organization (IMO). The essence of 
for last 40 years. Three sewage treatment plants are this agreement is that ships must have an approved ballast 
currently in place. Residential waste-water has also been water treatment plant which removes organisms. The 
treated since 2007. Between 35 and 40 % of cardboard, convention will enter into force 12 months after ratification 
aluminium and ferro metals are recycled. by 30 States, representing 35% of world merchant shipping 
Curacao: There are and have been several initiatives to recycle tonnage. However, the convention was (still) not in force in 
and reduce pollution. An ambitious green energy program is January 2014. In 2010, the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature 
being implemented that will gradually reduce dependence on and Food Safety (currently Economic Affairs), the 
fossil fuels. However, this is principally based on two Association of Regional Water Authorities and organizations 
windmill parks situated in areas sensitive to both nesting representing producers, importers, retailers and garden 
seabirds and roosting caves for endangered bats. centres agreed on a code of conduct on ornamental aquatic 
Saint Maarten: No changes or advances to report. plants. The code requires that several invasive ornamental 
aquatic plant species are no longer sold (listed in Annex 1 of 
III - Progress towards the 2015 and 2020 Aichi Biodiversity Targets and contributions to the releva | 65

phase for the mussel fishery sector. Since 2008 the while the PSSA status is important as a legal basis by 
fishermen are only allowed small scale mussel seed fishing, which to regulate international shipping and its 
under the condition that innovation of the sector will lead associated risks, over and around the Bank. As of June 
to a sustainable harvesting method by 2020. 2013, the Saba Bank received two ”associated protective 
Complementary to this arrangement a nature rehabilitation measures” to control the maritime activities in that area. 
programme was launched with the financial aid of the A ‘No-Anchoring’ zone for all ships has been established 
legally installed Wadden Fund. This rehabilitation to prevent the large ‘scars’ on the bottom, threatening 
programme is named ‘Towards a healthy Wadden Sea coral reefs and other unique sea life. Additionally, an 
Ecosystem for nature and man’ (‘Naar een rijke ‘Area To Be Avoided’ (ATBA) for ships of 300 gross tonnage 
Waddenzee’). or more came into force, as ships passing over the Bank 
 Internationally specific topics like environment and often destroy marker buoys of lobster and fish traps, 
biodiversity were downgraded in Dutch international causing the lost traps to continue fishing as so-called 
development cooperation policies due to the economic “ghost traps”. 
crisis, but a strategic choice was made to better integrate Many actions are underway to further minimize the 
them in broader programmes; for example, the ones that anthropogenic pressures on the coral reefs of the Caribbean 
are focussing on specific geographical areas (landscapes), Netherlands. These actions however cannot compensate for 
climate related programmes, food security and water impacts on a global scale, like climate change. The extent to 
programmes. which Aichi-target 10 can be achieved at all therefore 
 Altogether considerable progress has been made towards remains doubtful.
achieving Aichi-target 10 but continuation of policies and 
activities will be needed to improve the biological values of Aruba, Curacao and Saint Maarten
the Wadden Sea and to face the impacts of climate-change Aruba: Little improvement in this respect. Recreational 
on this and other vulnerable ecosystems. disturbance of nesting terns along the north coast tourist 
route remains intense, and real estate development 
Caribbean Netherlands pressure remains high.
Unusually warm ocean temperatures during the late Curacao: There is a zoning plan dating from 1997. However 
summer and fall of 2010 caused coral bleaching, which recreational disturbance continues to grow and forms an 
persisted long enough to kill about 10 to 20% of the corals important threat to nesting seabirds (Debrot et al., 2009). 
within six months (see § 1.2.1). Since the end of 2010, several Pressure on mangrove and sea-grass lagoons continues to 
measures have been taken (or are being prepared) to increase dramatically, even in the last remaining relatively 
decrease the anthropogenic pressures on the coral reefs of pristine area on the undeveloped eastern end of the island.
the Caribbean Netherlands. Among others: Saint Maarten: Pressures are increasing dramatically in all 
•	 Construction of the first Waste Water Treatment Plant on respects. Ship groundings on the main reef area occur 
Bonaire to decrease the impact of waste water on coral regularly. 
reefs.
•	 Measures to decrease the impacts of overgrazing of land, 3.1.3 Strategic G oal C: To improve the status of 
erosion of soil and consequently sediment deposition on biodiversity by safeguarding ecosystems, 
coral reef ecosystems for all islands. species and genetic diversity.
•	 Implementation of Guidelines of the International Three Aichi targets have been formulated to achieve 
Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships strategic goal C:
(MARPOL). 11. Protected areas increased and improved. 
•	 Implementation of an integral management plan for 12. Extinction prevented.
fisheries and marine biodiversity of the Exclusive 13. Genetic diversity maintained. 
Economic Zone (EEZ).
•	 In recent years the Saba Bank received several protection Aichi target 11. Protected areas increased and improved
measures. The area was officially declared the Saba Bank By 2020, at least 17 per cent of terrestrial and inland water areas 
National Park on 12 December 2010 and a management and 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, especially areas of 
plan was implemented. The Bank was declared a marine particular importance for biodiversity and ecosystem services, are 
protected area by the Dutch government on 21 December conserved through effectively and equitably managed, ecologi-
2010 and in October 2012 it was declared a Particularly cally representative and well-connected systems of protected 
Sensitive Sea Area (PSSA) by the Marine Environment areas and other effective area-based conservation measures, and 
Protection Committee (MEPC) of the International integrated into the wider landscape and seascape.
Maritime Organization (IMO). These designations 
prohibit anchoring by tankers and other large ships on Netherlands
the entire Bank, both in territorial waters and in the EEZ, The concept for the National Ecological Network (NEN) was 
III - Progress towards the 2015 and 2020 Aichi Biodiversity Targets and contributions to the releva | 67

IUCN Red List Category
Critically Endangered Vulnerable Total
Endangered
Plants 0 4 2 6
Mammals 0 3 5 8
Birds 0 1 3 4
Reptiles 2 6 0 8
Fish 1 6 18 25
Coral 2 2 7 11
Other invertebrates 0 0 1 1
Total 5 22 36 63
Table 1. Threatened species in the Caribbean Netherlands, according to the IUCN Red List database (version 2012.2).
conservation status of the Root Vole and Large Copper are international cooperation, like the establishment of a 
currently still assessed as “very unfavourable”. Marine Protected Area (MPA) in the Sargasso sea, the 
 Species outside protected areas in the Netherlands are nursery ground of European Eel; or defragmentation of 
protected by the Flora and Fauna act (§2.4). Every plan or rivers to allow migratory fish species like Atlantic Salmon 
action should be carefully planned and measures taken to and Atlantic Sturgeon to reach their nursery grounds. For 
minimise effects on protected species and their nests or the that the Netherlands among others agreed to ‘open up’ the 
places they stay. In the future the government wishes to Haringvlietdam, which blocks one of the main entrances of 
protect species by creating the right circumstances and the North Sea to the large European rivers Meuse and Rhine. 
conditions for their conservation or return (§2.1). The Flora This so-called ‘Kierbesluit’ was agreed in 2011 and the 
and Fauna act (§2.4) contains an article about the obligation measures will be finalised in 2018. 
to establish a red list and take action to protect the red list  Though the Netherlands make considerable efforts to 
species. Many species are protected by specific conserve threatened species the prevention of their 
measurements taken by NGO’s and many volunteers such as extinction often not only depends on species protection 
the protection of meadow bird nests against agricultural plans but also on international cooperation efforts as well 
activities or to help toads cross the roads on their migration as the progress on other targets like defragmentation of 
to mating places. nature and a decrease in pollution. 
 Aichi-target 12 however is (mainly) focussed at the global Caribbean Netherlands, Aruba, Curacao and Saint Maarten
IUCN Red List of threatened species (no subspecies). The The IUCN Red List database only lists the threatened species 
IUCN Red list for the Netherlands can however only be partly for Aruba and the (former) Netherlands Antilles. 
used to assess Aichi-target 12, as it does not match with the Information for the separate islands cannot be extracted 
9
Dutch Species Catalogue. Harmonisation measures are from the present database version. 
currently being carried out. The Critically Endangered (CR)  The Dutch Species Catalogue in addition currently has no 
species are the most threatened with extinction. In information on the Caribbean species.
compliance with the Dutch Species Catalogue, all of the The most recent information for the IUCN threatened 
species are fish : European Eel (Anguilla Anguilla), Atlantic species comes from the new Nature Policy Plan (NPP-2017) 
Sturgeon (Acipenser sturio) and Angel Shark (Squatina for the Caribbean Netherlands (table 1). To date 63 species 
squatina). Several measures especially for Eel (see §2.4.4) are listed as threatened of which 5 are Critically Endangered 
and Sturgeon (see §1.2.1) have been taken to conserve these (CR), 22 Endangered (EN) and 36 Vulnerable (VU). No less 
and other threatened species. than 75% of the threatened species, all of which are CR 
 Despite these measures, none of the threatened native species, depend completely or for most of their lifecycle 
species population trends is currently listed by the global (e.g. marine turtles) on marine habitat. Many can be 
IUCN Red List as increasing or stable. Besides that, none of considered transboundary species which indicates that 
the species is endemic to the Netherlands, and several can cooperation with other Caribbean states is needed to 
be considered migratory, trans boundary or incidentally improve or sustain species populations. 
occurring. Their conservation therefore depends on  The IUCN Red List regards most threatened species 
populations as decreasing, though future monitoring 
programs will need to clarify the current status and trends 
9 
Dutch Species Catalogue: www.nederlandsesoorten.nl. The Dutch 
for most species.
Species Catalogue provides a current and comprehensive overview 
of Dutch biodiversity.
III - Progress towards the 2015 and 2020 Aichi Biodiversity Targets and contributions to the releva | 69

production process. Since 1970, a small number of crops There is currently a strong research focus on clarifying the 
have almost disappeared from production systems, current situation, illustrated by the TEEB studies (§1.1.1) and 
including rye, oats, pulses, caraway, and fodder beets. The other ongoing research by the Netherlands Environmental 
number of farms cultivating these crops and the number of Assessment Agency and other institutes. This will be the 
varieties offered in the market has decreased to a similar basis for the formulation of policy strategies to map 
extent. Whereas this trend commenced in the 1970s, a final ecosystem services, apply TEEB and restore and safeguard 
reduction has taken place over the last decade. Substantial essential ecosystem services (see also §2.1 and §2.3.2). 
traditional crop diversity however is currently maintained in  Despite the current focus on essential ecosystem services 
gardens, rather than on farms, and in-garden conservation in the Netherlands their analysis and evaluation is still at an 
of traditional varieties has been shown to represent a robust early stage, as is the process towards their safeguarding and 
conservation system. The genetic diversity of crops that have restoration. One of the actions of the Natural Capital 
almost completely disappeared from the Dutch farming Agenda (Min. EZ & Min. I&M, 2013) is the development of 
systems is now largely conserved in ex situ collections in the the digital atlas of natural capital in the Netherlands.
Netherlands and abroad.  Internationally the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
 Aichi-target 13 is still a concern. Though considerable its embassies, Dutch Ministries, water boards, civil society 
efforts have been carried out to conserve the native livestock organizations, knowledge institutes and companies support 
breeds and crops, many are still at risk. various programmes that promote protection and 
sustainable use of ecosystems. The challenge is to 
Caribbean Netherlands, Aruba, Curacao and Saint Maarten integrated the values of ecosystem services with government 
Agro-genetic biodiversity is not an issue in the Caribbean policies. Several of these programmes combine 
Netherlands, nor Aruba, Curacao or Saint Maarten (see participatory land use planning that is guided by science, 
1.2.2). integrated water resources management, promotion of 
renewable energy and the facilitation of value chains for 
Aruba, Curacao and Saint Maarten sustainable products and services that can be 
Aruba: There are no unique traditional crops to be accommodated in climate robust landscapes. 
conserved. Examples of such programmes are the Initiative for 
Curacao: No unique agricultural crops or farm species to Sustainable Land and Water of IDH, the SUSTAIN Africa 
protect. Not applicable programme of IUCN, which aims to make economic growth 
Saint Maarten: No unique native crops or livestock to corridors in Africa more sustainable, and a programme of 
conserve. The accidental introduction of the invasive green the Horn of Africa Regional Environment Centre and 
iguana is causing genetic erosion and endangering the Network in the Rift Valley and the cross-border Boma-
Lesser Antillean Iguana, Iguana delicatissima. The species Gambella Landscape in South-West Ethiopia and South 
may already have been irretrievably lost. Sudan. This latter landscape contains an informal economic 
growth corridor with large agricultural development but 
3.1.4 Strategic G oal D: Enhance the benefits to all also a still rather unknown ecosystem with an annual 
from biodiversity and ecosystem services migration of about 850.000 white eared kob deer and many 
Three Aichi targets have been formulated to achieve other wild animals, including large mammals like elephant 
strategic goal D: and giraffe, that has eco-tourism development potential. 
14. Ecosystems and their essential services safeguarded Other examples include the Ecosystem Alliance programme 
15. Ecosystems restored and resilience enhanced (collaboration of IUCN NL, BothENDS and Wetlands 
16. Nagoya Protocol in force and operational International), supporting civil society in 16 countries in the 
(sub-) tropics with the objective to improve ecosystem 
Aichi target 14. Ecosystems and their essential services safeguarded management for the benefit of local communities. Another 
By 2020, ecosystems that provide essential services, including example is the IUCN NL ‘Transboundary Governance African 
services related to water, and contribute to health, livelihoods Great Lakes’ programme empowering local communities to 
and well-being, are restored and safeguarded, taking into safeguard the unique ecosystems in the African Great Lakes 
account the needs of women, indigenous and local communi- zone.
ties and the poor and vulnerable.
Caribbean Netherlands
Netherlands The TEEB studies on Bonaire, Saba, and Saint Eustatius will 
Coastal protection by sand dunes and water purification by better identify essential services provided by the ecosystems 
the same dunes are just two of the essential ecosystem on the islands and provide the islands with the tools to 
services that are well safeguarded in the Netherlands. The restore or safeguard these services. Coral reefs provide 
Netherlands is still in an early phase however in relation to essential ecosystem services for tourism, the prevention of 
analysing and evaluating other essential ecosystem services. erosion and nursery of fishes, but are globally deteriorating. 
III - Progress towards the 2015 and 2020 Aichi Biodiversity Targets and contributions to the releva | 71

and on Klein Curacao and eradication of predatory cats on the matter is attended to.
Klein Curacao. Partial recovery of the keystone species black Saint Maarten: Draft policy documents are available but have 
sea urchin, and sea turtle populations have occurred not been acted upon by government (Meesters et al. 2010). 
(Debrot et al. 2005, Debrot and Nagelkerken 2006). Key This means that the island can miss out completely on bio 
mangrove, seagrass and fish nursery areas continue to pharmacy discoveries in in the future, unless the matter is 
decline due to mounting recreational user pressures (e.g. attended to.
Spaanse Water).
Saint Maarten: Ecosystem degradation and habitat destruction 3.1.5 Strategic G oal E: Enhance implementation 
is proceeding at the highest pace of all Dutch Caribbean through participatory planning, knowledge 
islands. management and capacity building.
Four Aichi targets have been formulated to achieve strategic 
Aichi target 16. Nagoya Protocol in force and operational goal E:
By 2015, the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and 17. NBSAPs adopted as policy instrument. 
the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their 18. Traditional knowledge respected
Utilization is in force and operational, consistent with national 19. Knowledge improved, shared and applied 
legislation. 20. Financial resource from all sources increased 
Netherlands and Caribbean Netherlands Aichi target 17. national biodiversity strategy and action plan adopted 
The Netherlands signed the Nagoya Protocol on 23 June as policy instrument
2011. As it is a mixed treaty, partly EU competence and partly By 2015, each Party has developed, adopted as a policy instru-
national competence, a regulation to implement the ment, and has commenced implementing, an effective, 
Nagoya Protocol is currently being negotiated within the EU participatory and updated national biodiversity strategy and 
(Min. EZ, 2013h). Negotiations on implementing legislation action plan.
within the EU will have to result in EU- and national 
implementation in the years to come. Also, the Dutch Netherlands
government supports initiatives in relation to Access and The Netherlands has had a national biodiversity strategy 
Benefit Sharing cooperation with third countries. The with action (NBSAP) plans for many decades. The 
Nagoya protocol is expected to be in force and operational internationally agreed biodiversity commitments have been 
by 2015. integrated, as appropriate, in relevant domestic policy 
 In anticipation of these developments the Dutch papers. Key government policy papers for nature and 
government aims to support a Green Deal to apply the biodiversity are:
international agreements on Access and Benefit Sharing •	 Nature Policy Plan (Min. LNV, 1990).
(ABS; Min. EZ & Min I&M, 2013). In a pilot project, •	 ’Nature for people, people for nature: policy document 
businesses from the Dutch breeding sector, knowledge for nature, forest and landscape in the 21st century’ (Min. 
institutions and government will aim to set up cooperation LNV, 2000).
with similar parties from a developing country that could •	 ’Sources of our existence: conservation and the 
provide genetic resources. By the end of 2014 this should sustainable use of genetic diversity’ (Min. LNV et al., 
result in an agreement on the access to genetic resources 2002).
and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from •	 ’Biodiversity works: for nature, for people, for ever: the 
the use of the relevant genetic material. The agreement biodiversity policy programme of the Netherlands 
could serve as a model for future ABS agreements.  2008-2011 (Min. LNV, 2008a)’.
 The protocol will apply for both the Netherlands and the •	 Vision for Nature (in preparation).
Caribbean Netherlands, with the EU-legislation applicable The most recent Programme is the ’Natural Capital Agenda 
in the Netherlands only, giving the opportunity to adapt any 2013’ (Min. EZ & Min. I&M, 2013), sent to the Dutch 
measure in Caribbean Netherlands to the specific situation. parliament in June 2013, that addresses the key challenges 
Reasonable progress has been made on Aichi-target 16. of the 2020 biodiversity targets. Key government policy 
papers which integrate biodiversity include:
Aruba, Curacao and Saint Maarten •	 ’Fourth National Environmental Policy Plan’ (Min. VROM, 
Aruba: Benefits for use of biodiversity and genetic resources 2001). 
has not been regulated by law. •	 The National Policy Strategy for Infrastructure and Spatial 
Curacao: Draft policy documents are available but have not Planning (SVIR).
been acted upon by government (Meesters et al. 2010). This With the current national biodiversity policy papers and 
means that the island has missed out completely on several action plans Aichi-target 17 can be considered to have been 
(marine) biopharmacy discoveries in recent years and will achieved by 2015.
continue to miss out on this important opportunity unless 
III - Progress towards the 2015 and 2020 Aichi Biodiversity Targets and contributions to the releva | 73

natural resources, which includes useful traditional 
Box 2 Ecological monitoring in the Netherlands
knowledge. Traditional cultural values are taken into 
The Netherlands has a long history of ecological 
account to effectively implement nature conservation 
monitoring. With the increased national and 
measures. Altogether Aichi target 18 can be regarded to be 
European juridical obligations in relation to nature 
achieved.
conservation it became clear that the collected data 
did not always meet the knowledge required by the 
Aruba, Curacao and Saint Maarten
government and others. Therefore in 1999 the 
Aruba: Aruba is rapidly losing traditional knowledge because 
Ecological Monitoring Network (NEM) was set up.  
there are fewer elders. There are no serious efforts to 
The NEM is a cooperation between governmental 
document this knowledge. The book by Dinha Veeris (1999) 
organisations on the monitoring of nature in the 
documents some traditional knowledge about the use of 
Netherlands that aims to adjust the collection of data 
plants.
to governmental needs. The NEM follows the trends 
Curacao: Several contributions to this effect have been made, 
of nearly all species groups relevant for nature policy.. 
the best-known being that of Veeris (1999). However, 
As such the NEM can be considered as the backbone 
traditional information is rapidly being lost due to 
of the monitoring of nature in the Netherlands. The 
globalization and changing lifestyles.
NEM mainly commissions Private Data Collecting 
Saint Maarten: Several contributions to this effect have been 
Organisations (PGO’s) to carry out the monitoring 
made, the best-known being that of Nielsen and Schnabel 
schemes and is therefore a well established example 
(2007) for Saba. However, traditional information is rapidly 
of citizen science. The NEM monitoring protocols are 
being lost due to globalization and changing lifestyles.
standardized in cooperation with Statistics 
Netherlands (CBS). CBS is also responsible for data 
Aichi target 19. Knowledge improved, shared and applied
analysis, which strongly improves the statistical 
By 2020, knowledge, the science base and technologies relating 
reliability of the reported status and trends of species 
to biodiversity, its values, functioning, status and trends, and 
of the EU Habitats Directive and Birds Directive in the 
the consequences of its loss, are improved, widely shared and 
Netherlands. 
transferred, and applied.
 In addition to the standardized monitoring data, 
the NEM more and more uses less standardized data 
Netherlands
from other sources. The amount of such opportunistic 
The Netherlands has a long history in environmental 
data increases rapidly due to easily accessible 
research and biodiversity monitoring (see Box 2). 
websites and apps on mobile phones. New statistical 
Researchers, conservation site managers, consultants, 
modelling by CBS make these data suitable for 
NGO’s and policy makers cooperate in a Knowledge Network 
monitoring purposes. 
(OB+N) since 1989 to conserve and restore ecosystems in the 
 The Ministry of Economic Affairs established the 
Netherlands. The Netherlands Environmental Assessment 
National Database Flora and Fauna in 2007 (NDFF) in 
Agency in cooperation with scientific institutes and NGO’s 
order to make data accessible. The NDFF can be 
periodically reports about the status and trends of nature, 
considered a data warehouse which contains the data 
biodiversity and of other environmental issues in the 
of plants and animals that have been collected by 
Netherlands. Examples of other environmental issues are 
PGO’s, other organisations and volunteers over 
environmental pollution, protein use, use of several natural 
previous decades. All data entering the NDFF are 
resources, such as fish stocks. The tasks to make these 
validated. To date the NDFF contains over 70 million 
reports are legally written down in the Nature Conservation 
records on the distribution of flora and fauna, which is 
Act (§2.4).The nature policy of the Netherlands is largely 
the result of combining over many databases. Each 
based on the outcome of these reports. The information is 
year more than 6 million new data are added to the 
widely available. The Dutch language website www.
database. The database is being used by the govern-
compendiumvoordeleefomgeving.nl includes some 2000 
ment, municipalities, provinces, districts, conservatio-
indicators on nature and the environment. The most 
nists, construction industries and others.
important indicators, like those needed for the CBD-report, 
are regularly updated. An overall indicator of ecosystem 
services or availability of natural capital is still under 
development.
III - Progress towards the 2015 and 2020 Aichi Biodiversity Targets and contributions to the releva | 75

on Biological Diversity as a global collective target (COP 11, and also charges entry fees to the visiting public. A small 
Hyderabad 2012). Current actions by the Netherlands are in grant cycle exists for social and environmental projects.
line with the agreements made at COP 11 in terms of Curacao: The government of Curacao has traditionally been 
stabilising the level of spending for global biodiversity. In the the best of all islands in terms of providing structural 
coming years The Netherlands will develop a methodology to (although very limited) funding for nature management, 
estimate the contributions of non-governmental players to science and conservation education (almost all through 
the accomplishment of the Aichi targets. Carmabi). Since 10/10/10 however, funding has declined and 
become less certain, whilst the need for funding has only 
Caribbean Netherlands increased.
It remains a challenge to provide sustainable and regular Saint Maarten: The Nature Foundations receives minimal 
funding to cover the operating costs of the organizations funding from government for their program and so user 
managing the marine and terrestrial protected areas on the fees are obtained from marine park users. Funding remains 
six Caribbean islands concerned. To support this important very deficient and the increase has only been minimal when 
work a trust fund was created by the Dutch Caribbean compared to what is needed to address this important 
12
Nature Alliance (DCNA ) in 2006 and a Trust Fund bank national task. This is disappointing considering that Saint 
account was setup with the Rabobank in the Netherlands. Maarten is a well-developed and prosperous island.
The capital is locked in for a defined period and cannot be 
used to solve short-term funding needs. Revenues from the 3.2  Contribution of actions to implement the 
fund are reinvested (not withdrawn from the Trust Fund), Convention towards the achievement of the 
and will be until 2016, when a review will take place. A Trust relevant 2015 targets of the MDG’s 
Fund Committee was created by DCNA and provides The prime mandate for Development Cooperation in the 
coordination, leadership and decision making power Netherlands lies with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the 
throughout this process. The Dutch Ministry of the Interior Directorate General for International Cooperation (DGIS). 
contributes €750,000 annually (until 2016). DCNA also The main objective of DGIS is to contribute to structural 
became a beneficiary of the Dutch Postcode Lottery in poverty alleviation in developing countries and to stimulate 
February 2009. From each annual donation of €500,000 sustainable development. The environment, as a major 
from the Lottery, €200,000 is deposited straight into DCNA’s component of sustainable development, is integrated in all 
Trust Fund account. DGIS policies and interventions: attention for environment-
 For the implementation of the NPP-2017 the Ministry of related services, “greening” of all relevant development 
EZ has earmarked € 7.5 million for nature conservation sectors, sustainable management of the worlds’ ecosystems. 
projects on the islands to be implemented over a period of One of the major challenges for Dutch Aid is to respond to 
four years, specifically intended to catch up on outstanding the Millennium Development Goals. The Netherlands 
or overdue management measures. Projects will be targeted particularly aims to contribute to achieving MDG1, MDG7 
at coral reef conservation, in particular through reduction and MDG8: linking poverty alleviation to the sustainable use 
of erosion, sustainable use of nature e.g. through improved of natural resources, creating a better environment and 
accessibility of nature, and to improve the synergy between sustainable economic growth (trade / value chains).
nature, land use (agriculture) and tourism. Data on projects and other activities in biodiversity 
 In addition a yearly € 600,000 is available for conservation and management within development 
13
implementation of the NPP-2017, plus € 500,000 for cooperation can be found on the PROFORIS website The 
research, monitoring and reporting on biodiversity. The PROFORIS database contains information on Netherlands 
islands receive € 800,000 per year to support them in their Government funded programmes and projects in the areas 
nature management responsibilities, to be used at their of international nature, forest, water and biological 
own discretion. Revenues from park entrance fees are diversity. This website is there to inform the general public 
invested in nature management, but budgets from other on the Netherlands government’s worldwide support in 
local sources are unfortunately hardly available on the these areas.
islands.Though the challenges ahead are far larger than can  Internationally the Netherlands contributes mainly to 
be covered by current budgets, the financial resources have programmes focussing on water and food security, 
increased substantially. As such Aichi target 20 can be including topics like sustainable land use and management 
regarded to be achieved. of ecosystems, thereby recognising the (potential) impacts 
of climate change. This is mainly materialised by 
Aruba, Curacao and Saint Maarten development cooperation activities in the fields of 
Aruba: Funding has not increased. Arikok National Park sustainable agricultural production and market systems and 
receives significant funding from government for staff costs sustainable water use and water management. Several 
12 13 
Websites DCNA: www.dcna.nl or www.dcnanature.org PROFORIS: www.proforis.nl
III - Progress towards the 2015 and 2020 Aichi Biodiversity Targets and contributions to the releva | 77

Appendixes
Appendix I: Information concerning the reporting party and preparation of the  
 fifth national report  80
Appendix II: Further sources of information  81
Appendix III. National implementation of the thematic programmes of work and plans  
 under the CBD or decisions of the CoP related to cross-cutting issues 86
Appendix IV. Summary of progress on Aichi-targets, Netherlands (excl. Caribbean Netherlands). 87
Appendix V. Summary of progress on Aichi-targets, Caribbean Netherlands, Curacao,  
 Aruba and St. Maarten. 90
Appendixes | 79

Appendix II: Further sources of information 
Publications Reefs - with particular attention to previously undescribed 
 Alebeek, F.A.N., van, Visser, A. en Van den Broek, R., 2007. phenomena illustrating the ongoing decline of Bonaire’s 
Akkerranden als (winter) schuilplaats voor natuurlijke reefs. 17p. 
vijanden. Entomologische berichten 67, 223-225. CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR (2008a). Exoten in zoutwater 
 Arnold, S. and Steneck, R. 2010. Running the gauntlet: (indicator 1049, versie 01, 9 mei 2008). www.
inhibitory effects of algal turfs on the processes of coral compendiumvoordeleefomgeving.nl. CBS, Den Haag; 
recruitment. Mar Ecol Prog Ser, 414: 91–105. Planbureau voor de Leefomgeving, Den Haag/Bilthoven en 
 Bervoets, T., 2010a. St. Maarten Nature Foundation Wageningen UR, Wageningen.
Lionfish Response Plan. Nature Foundation St. Maarten:  CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR (2008b). Exoten in de 
30p. Nederlandse flora (indicator 1398, versie 02, 29 april 2008). 
 Bervoets, T. 2010. Working Paper on the Economic  CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR, 2009. Ontwikkelingen in de 
Valuation of Country St. Maarten’s Coral Reef Resources landbouw, 1900-2008 (indicator 1515, versie 02, 14 mei 
Nature Foundation, St. Maarten. 18 pp. 2009). 
 Boer, T.A. de, A.T. de Blaeij, B.H.M. Elands, H.C.M. de  CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR (2012). Milieucondities in 
Bakker en C.S.A. van Koppen (in prep). Het maatschappelijk water en natuurgebieden, 1990 - 2010 (indicator 1522, versie 
draagvlak voor natuur en natuurbeleid. WOT-rapport. 04, 16 november 2012).
 Bos, O., R. Witbaard, M. Lavaleye, G. van Moorsel, L.R.  CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR, 2013. Bedreigde en niet-
Teal, R. van Hal, T. van der Hammen, R. ter Hofstede, R. van bedreigde soorten, 1997- 2011 (indicator 1521, versie 05, 25 
Bemmelen, R.H. Witte, S. Geelhoed & E.M. Dijkman, 2011. juni 2013).
Biodiversity hotspots on the Dutch Continental Shelf. A  CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR, 2013a. Opbrengsten van 
Marine Strategy Framework Directive Perspective. Report groene belastingen, 1987-2011 (indicator 0360, versie 11, 5 
number C071/11. Imares. maart 2013).
 Bush, S.R., B. Belton, D. Hall, P. Vandergeest, F. J. Murray,  CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR, 2013b. Migratiemogelijkheden 
S. Ponte, P. Oosterveer, M. S. Islam, A. P. J. Mol, M. voor trekvissen, 2012 (indicator 1350, versie 06, 6 februari 
Hatanaka, F. Kruijssen, T. T. T. Ha, D. C. Little, R. 2013). 
Kusumawati, 2013. Certify Sustainable Aquaculture? Science  CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR, 2013c. Aantal bedreigde 
Vol. 341: 1067-1068. soorten (indicator 1052, versie 11, 8 mei 2013).
 Burg, W.J. van der; Freitas, J.de; Debrot, A.O. en L.A.P.  CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR, 2013d. Recent teruggekomen 
Lotz, 2012. Naturalised and invasive alien plant species in soorten, 2012 (indicator 1056, versie 15, 16 augustus 2013).
the Caribbean Netherlands: status, distribution, threats,  CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR, 2013e. Biologische landbouw: 
priorities and recommendations. PRI report 437/Imares aantal bedrijven en areaal, 1991-2012 (indicator 0011, versie 
report C185/11. 82p. 12, 13 mei 2013).
 Buurt, G, van and R. van der Berg. 2010. Review Status of  CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR, 2013f. Barrières en 
Implementation of the Convention on Biodiversity of Dutch versnippering van de Ecologische Hoofdstructuur, 2005-2011 
Caribbean. Draft Report. CURCONSULT n.v. 45 pp. (indicator 2051, versie 07, 16 april 2013). 
 Buurt, G. van and A.O. Debrot, 2011a. Exotic and invasive  CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR,2013g. Exoten in zoetwater, 
terrestrial and freshwater animal species in the Dutch 1900 - 2010 (indicator 1355, versie 04, 25 juni 2013).
Caribbean. IMARES report C001/12. CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR, 2013h. Exoten in de 
 Buurt, G. van and A.O. Debrot, 2011b. Introduced Nederlandse fauna, 1900/2012 (indicator 1375, versie 02, 14 
agricultural pests, plant and animals diseases and vectors in mei 2013).
the Dutch Caribbean, with an “Alert species” list. IMARES  CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR, 2013j. Ledenaantal particuliere 
Report number C193/11. 37p. natuur- en milieuorganisaties, 1989 - 2012. (indicator 1281, 
 Buurt, G. van, and A. O. Debrot. 2012. Exotic and invasive versie 10, 16 april 2013). 
terrestrial and freshwater animal species in the Dutch  CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR, 2013k. Internationaal belang 
Caribbean. IMARES Report number C001/12. 37 pp. Nederland voor watervogels (indicator 1048, versie 05, 9 juli 
 Burg, W. J., van der, J. de Freitas, A. O. Debrot and L. A. P. 2013
Lotz. 2012. Naturalised and invasive alien plant species in  CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR, 2013l. Ontwikkeling 
the Caribbean Netherlands: status, distribution, threats, bedreiging diersoorten 1994-2012 (indicator 1478, versie 02, 
priorities and recommendations. PRI report 437. Imares 19 september 2013. 
report C185/11. 82 pp. CBS, PBL, Wageningen UR, 2013m. Aantalsontwikkeling 
 Carmabi Foundation, 2011. Inventory of Bonaire’s Coral overwinterende watervogels, 1975-2011 (indicator 1382, 
Appendixes | 81

Landbouwhuisdierrassen? Deel 2: De diersoorten varken,  Lammers, G.W., A. van Hinsberg, W. Loonen, M.J.S.M. 
gevogelte, hond en konijn. Reijnen, M.E. Sanders, 2005. Optimalisatie Ecologische 
 IUCN, 2010. Review of the Status of Implementation of Hoofdstructuur. Milieu- en Natuurplanbureau Rapport nr. 
the Convention on Biological Diversity and of Biodiversity 408768003. 96p.
Action Plans in the European Union Overseas Entities. IUCN  León, R. de, Kim Vane, Paulo Bertuol, Valérie C. 
Programme on European Union Outermost Region and Chamberland, Fernando Simal, Eseld Imms, Mark J.A. 
Overseas Countries and Territories. 46 pp. Vermeij. (in prep.) The Effectiveness of Lionfish Removal 
 IUCN, 2011. Coral Reef Resilience Assessment of the Efforts in the Southern Caribbean. Endangered Species 
Bonaire National Marine Park, Netherlands Antilles. Gland, Research.
Switzerland: IUCN. 51pp.  McKinsey & Company, 2010. The next environmental 
 IUCN, 2012; Report of the Tropical Americas Coral Reef issue for business: McKinsey Global Survey results.
Resilience Workshop. MEA, 2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-being: 
 Jackson, J., Donovan M., Cramer K. and V. Lam (eds.), Biodiversity Synthesis. Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 
2013. Status and Trends of Caribbean Coral Reefs 1970-2012. World Resources Institute, Washington, DC.
Global Coral Reef Monitoring Network. 238 p. Meesters, E., D. Slijkerman, M. de Graaf, and D. Debrot, 
 Jansen, H., R. Hoving & S. J. Hiemstra, 2013. Hoe gaat het 2010. Management plan for the natural resources of the EEZ 
met de zeldzame landbouwhuisdierrassen in Nederland? of the Dutch Caribbean, IMARES, Wageningen UR, Report 
Deel 1: de diersoorten rund, paard, schaap en geit. Zeldzaam number C100/10.
Huisdier: p. 6-8.  Min. EL&I, 2012. Monitor Duurzaam Voedsel 2011. 
 Jongman, R.H.G., E.H.W.G. Meesters en D.A. Debrot, Ministerie van Economische Zaken, Landbouw en 
2010. Biodiversiteit voor de BES-eilanden: Bonaire, St. Innovatie. 40p.
Eustatius en Saba; Onderzoeksvragen en verplichtingen.  Min. EL&I, 2012a. Stand van zaken biodiversiteitbeleid. 
Wageningen, Alterra, Alterra-rapport 2080; IMARES-rapport Kamerbrief, kenmerk 276079. Ministerie van Economische 
C117/10: 67p.P. Zaken, Landbouw en Innovatie. 9p.
 Kabat, C.M.J. Jacobs, R.W.A. Hutjes, W. Hazeleger, M.  Min. EL&I, 2013. Kamerbrief, kenmerk DGNR-NB / 
Engelmoer, J.P.M. Witte, R. Roggema, E.J. Lammerts, J. 13157005 Ministerie van Economische Zaken, Landbouw en 
Bessembinder, P. Hoekstra en M. van den Berg, 2009. Innovatie. Bijlage Natuurpact.
Klimaatverandering en het Waddengebied. Position paper  Min. EZ & Min. I&M, 2013. Uitvoeringsagenda Natuurlijk 
Klimaat en Water. Waddenacademie. 89p. Kapitaal: behoud en duurzaam gebruik van biodiversiteit. 
 Kleijn, D., 2013. De effectiviteit van Agrarisch Ministerie van Economische Zaken en Ministerie van 
Natuurbeheer. Alterra: 23p. Infrastructuur en Milieu. Kamerbrief, kenmerk DGNR-NB / 
 Knegt, B. de, M. van Eupen, A. van Hinsberg, R. Pouwels, 13091035. 16p.
M.S.J.M. Reijnen, S. de Vries, W.G.M. van der Bilt & S. van  Min. EZ & Min. I&M, 2013a. Meerjarenprogramma 
Tol, 2011. Ecologische en recreatieve beoordeling van Ontsnippering. Jaarverslag 2012. Ministerie van 
toekomstscenario’s voor natuur op het land. Economische Zaken en Ministerie van Infrastructuur en 
Achtergronddocument bij Natuurverkenning 2011. Milieu. 37p.
Wettelijke Onderzoekstaken Natuur & Milieu, WOT- Min. EZ, 2013a. Natuurbeleidsplan Caribisch Nederland. 
werkdocument 269. 63 blz. Ministerie van Economische Zaken. 52p. 
 KPMG, 2012a. Green, healthy and productive. The  Min. EZ, 2013c. Groene Groei: voor een sterke, duurzame 
Economics of Ecosystems & Biodiversity (TEEB NL): Green economie. Ministerie van Economische Zaken. 8p.
space and health. Min. EZ, 2013d. Vooruit met natuurbeleid – tussenbalans. 
 KPMG, 2012b. TEEB for Business. The Economics of Ministerie van Economische Zaken. Kamerbrief, kenmerk 
Ecosystems & Biodiversity (TEEB NL): 132p. DGNR-NB / 13174267. 8p.
 Kragten, S., de Snoo, G.R., 2007. Nest success of Lapwings  Min. EZ, 2013e. Kennisprogramma Duurzaam Door. 
(Vanellus vanellus) on organic and conventional arable Sociale innovatie voor een  
farms in the Netherlands. Ibis 149: 742-749. groene economie 2013-2016’. Ministerie van Economische 
 Kwakernaak, C., J. van den Akker, E. Veenendaal, K. van Zaken. 41p.
Huissteden en P. Kroon, 2010. Veenweiden en klimaat.  Min. EZ, 2013f. Voortgang programmatische aanpak 
Mogelijkheden voor mitigatie en adaptatie. Bodem, nr. 3: stikstof. Ministerie van Economische Zaken, Kamerbrief, 
p6-8. kenmerk DGNR-PDN2000 / 13157943. 2p.
 Kroon, P. S.; Schrier-Uijl, A. P.; Hensen, A.; Veenendaal, E.  Min. EZ, 2013g. Ambtelijke beleidsverkenning om te 
M.; Jonker, H. J. J., 2010. Annual balances of CH4 and N2O komen tot een Natuurambitie Grote Wateren 2050-2100. 
from a managed fen meadow using eddy covariance flux Ministerie van Economische Zaken. 98p. 
measurements. European Journal of Soil Science, Volume  Min. EZ, 2013h. Brief regering; EU-implementatie Nagoya 
61, Number 5:773-784(12). Protocol - Nieuwe Commissievoorstellen en initiatieven van 
Appendixes | 83

 UNDP, 2011. First Millennium Development Goals Report 
Curacao and St. Maarten. UNDP, Port of Spain, Trinidad and 
Tobago 126 pp.
 Veen, M.P. van, M.E. Sanders, A. Tekelenburg, J.A. 
Lorzing, A.L. Gerritsen en Th. van den Brink, 2010. Evaluatie 
biodiversiteitsdoelstelling 2010. Achtergronddocument bij 
de Balans van de Leefomgeving 2010. PBL-
publicatienummer: 500402019. Planbureau voor de 
Leefomgeving, Den Haag/Bilthoven
 Verweij, P. & A. Schmidt, 2013. The Dutch Caribbean 
Biodiversity Database. BioNews Issue 06.
 Vosman, B., Baveco, H., den Belder, E., Bloem, J., Booij, 
K., Jagers op Akkerhuis, G., Lahr, J., Postma, J., Verloop, K. 
en Faber, J., 2007. Agrobiodiversiteit, kansen voor een 
duurzame landbouw. Plant Research International, 
Wageningen.
 Vriend, H.J. de, and Van Koningsveld, M., 2012. Building 
with Nature: Thinking, acting and interacting differently. 
EcoShape, Building with Nature, Dordrecht, the 
Netherlands.
 Wageningen UR, 2008. National Report for CSD-16, 2008. 
The Netherlands: A review of sustainable development in 
agriculture, land and rural development, drought and 
desertification, and Africa. Wageningen UR, The 
Netherlands. 53p.
 Wamelink, G.W.W.; Knegt, B. de; Pouwels, R.; Schuiling, 
C.; Wegman, R.M.A.; Schmidt, A.M.; Dobben, H.F. van; 
Sanders, M.E., 2013. Considerable environmental 
bottlenecks for species listed in the Habitats and Birds 
Directives in the Netherlands. Biological Conservation 165. 
 Wanningen, H., K. van den Wijngaard, T. Buijse & N. 
Breve, 2012. Nederland leeft met Vismigratie. Actualisatie 
landelijke database vismigratie. In opdracht van 
Sportvisserij Nederland en Planbureau voor de 
leefomgeving.
 Wetten, J. van, S. de Ligt, H. Kuijpers & R. van Dijk, 2012. 
Groen loont met TEEB Stad. 49p.
 Wolfs, E. and P. van Beukering, 2012. The Economics of 
Ecosystems and Biodiversity on Bonaire. What’s Bonaire’s 
Nature worth? Brochure. Institute for Environmental 
Studies, VU Amsterdam.
Databases: EFABIS; DCBD, Dutch Caribbean Biodiversity 
Database
Appendixes | 85

Appendix IV.   Summary of progress on Aichi-targets, Netherlands 
(excl. Caribbean Netherlands).
Aichi- Indicators used Main policy notes and actions Main progress made
targets (§ in report) (§ in report)
Strategic Goal A: Address the underlying causes of biodiversity loss by mainstreaming biodiversity across government and society
1.  Awareness 1.1.1 •	 Trend of members of 2.3.1 Involvement of citizens, business and Awareness relatively high and 
increased nature management 3.1.1 industry: participation is increasing. On the other 
organisations   •	 Natural Capital Agenda Ad IV 16 hand, due to the crisis a growing number 
•	 Trend of participants and   policy letter ‘Forward with nature policy’ of people think that nature should not 
locations Nature Work be among the four top priorities for the 
Days Dutch government.
•	 Public support survey
•	 Corporate Social 
Responsibility
2. Biodiversity  Spatial plans, Codes of 2.3.3 •	 Flora and Fauna act, Nature conservation Considerable progress on all related 
values   conduct, Environmental 3.1.2 act. aspects achieved and improving.
integrated assessments, •	 National Policy Strategy for Spatial Since 1995 the NEN is incorporated in 
Planning (SVIR) spatial plans. The government uses 
spatial information about protected 
species according to the flora and fauna 
act to demand mitigation and 
compensation measures when they 
allow spatial development and 
construction within their territories.
3. Incentives    3.1.3 •	 Green Growth Progress is limited due to positive 
reformed (greening of the EU CAP en CFP; 
sustainability criteria on renewable 
energy) and negative (harmful subsidies 
in energy, transport and agricultural 
sectors not reformed) developments 
4.  Sustainable 2.4.1 •	 Trend in area used for 2.4 •	 Natural Capital Agenda ad I Reasonable progress made though 
consumption 2.4.2 organic farming 3.1.4 •	 Platform BEE agricultural sector still a concern.
and 2.4.3 •	 Trend in forest area (ha) •	 Governments, business and 
production 2.4.4 with FSC-label stakeholders work on sustainable 
2.4.5 •	 Trend in fish production and consumption.
consumption, incl. •	 Major steps taken to keep impacts of 
MSC-label use of natural resources within safe 
•	 Status of market share ecological limits
sustainable raw •	 Concern still exists about the reform 
materials of the agricultural sector and the 
ecological footprint.
Strategic Goal B: Reduce the direct pressures on biodiversity and promote sustainable use
5. Habitat loss  1.3.2 •	 Trends for 2.5 •	 Nature for people Reasonable progress made. 
halved or 1.2.1 defragmentation of 3.1.5 •	 policy letter ‘Forward with nature policy’ •	 Habitat loss stopped (already in 
reduced nature (MJPO)   •	 Nature Pact 1990).
•	 Barriers for migratory •	 Continues defragmentation of 
fish terrestrial and aquatic habitat.
•	 Trends for target species •	 Environmental pressures significantly 
in terrestrial ecosystems reduced though certain habitats still 
face degradation. 
Appendixes | 87

Aichi- Indicators used Main policy notes and actions Main progress made
targets (§ in report) (§ in report)
12.  Extinction 1.2.1 •	 Trends for national red 3.1.12 •	 National Red Lists Considerable efforts are carried out to 
prevented 1.3.1 list and non-red list   •	 policy letter ‘Forward with nature policy’ prevent species from extinction. The 
species   •	 Flora and Fauna Act number of species on several red lists is 
•	 Trends of water birds   •	 Nature Pact more or less stable or declining. However 
•	 Conservation status of     still concern about:
habitat types and species   •	 The trend in population size of several 
•	 Trend in farmland birds the red list species is still declining. 
•	 Status in number of •	 Status of many species and habitats is 
environmental still unfavourable. 
bottlenecks •	 Progress on targets like defragmentation 
and pollution
•	 International cooperation for migratory 
species 
13. Genetic  1.2.2 •	 Trend in heifer 3.1.13 •	 Sources of our existence Though considerable efforts have been 
diversity •	 Risk classification of     carried out to conserve the native livestock 
maintained Dutch farm animal   breeds and crops, many are still at risk. 
breeds
Strategic Goal D: Enhance the benefits to all from biodiversity and ecosystem services
14.  Ecosystems 1.1.2 Output TEEB studies 3.1.14 •	 Natural Capital Agenda Ad IV Despite the current focus on essential 
and ecosystem services its analyses and 
services valuation is at an early stage, as is the 
safeguar- process towards restoration and 
ded safeguarding. 
15.  Ecosystems 1.2.1 •	 Trends for target species 3.1.15 •	 NEN Current progress is limited and greatly 
restored, in terrestrial ecosystems •	 EU Water Framework Directive depends on the ability to restore peatlands 
resilience 1.3.1 •	 Trend in forest area •	 Delta Program and to transform them from carbon 
enhanced emitting into carbon sequestering areas. 
16.  ABS     3.1.16 •	 Protocol signed in 2011 Considerable progress made and the target 
Nagoya •	 Green deals on ABS is expected to be achieved by 2015.
Protocol 
operational
Strategic Goal E: Enhance implementation through participatory planning, knowledge management and capacity building
17.  NBSAPs     3.1.17 •	 Natuurvisie; With the current national biodiversity 
adopted as       •	 Natural Capital Agenda policy papers and action plans Aichi-target 
policy 17 can be considered to be achieved by 
instrument 2015.
18. T raditional     3.1.18 •	 No specific policies available. No specific progress. The Netherlands have 
knowledge no traditional peoples within its borders. 
respected Dutch NGO’s take action for people 
elsewhere in the world. 
19. Knowledge    •	 Development NDFF, 3.1.19 •	 Monitoring through NEM The target is very well developed in the 
improved,   NEM   •	 Storage of data in NDFF. Netherlands. Indicators are available on 
shared and •	 Development Database •	 Nature Conservation Act internet. Nature Conservation Act obliges 
applied Caribbean Netherlands •	 Environmental monitoring to report on status of nature
20. Financial  3.1.20   Current actions are in line with the 
resources agreements made in COP 11. Aichi-target 
increased 20 is collective EU task, but this has yet not 
resulted in (substantial) increase of 
sources.
Appendixes | 89

Aichi- Caribbean Indicators used Policy notes and actions Progress 
targets Islands (status and trends)
3. Incentives  Caribbean None None None
reformed Netherlands
Aruba No economic valuation of nature ecosystem None None
service
Curacao None None None
St. Maarten None None None
4. Sustainable  Caribbean None •	 Mainstreaming	biodiversity	in	all	sectors	is	 Reasonable progress
consumption Netherlands one of two main targets Nature Policy Plan 
and 2013-2017, and includes 17 strategic 
production actions. 
•	 Monitoring	of	fisheries	 on	all	three	islands,	
especially Saba bank, to enable 
sustainability
•	 Program	with	WFF	on	sustainability	
Bonaire
•	 Studies	sustainable	livestock	fodder	
production Bonaire.
Aruba None •	 Recycling	purely	private	initiative Reasonable progress
•	 Sustainable	energy	use	government	
simulated and supported by private 
initiatives
•	 Annual	Green	conference	in	September
Curacao Limited recycling glass, metals, plastics None None
St. Maarten No recycling/reuse Parliamentary motion to ban use of plastic None
bags but not implemented
Strategic Goal B: Reduce the direct pressures on biodiversity and promote sustainable use
5.  Habitat loss Caribbean Zoning regulations for Bonaire and St. •	 Plans	 	to	reduce	degradation	from	 Reasonable progress
halved or Netherlands Eustatius overgrazing
reduced Limited development to maximum altitude 
at Saba.
Aruba Physical Development Policy 2009 addresses •	 Arik	 ok	National	Park	legally	declared	by	 Reasonable 
among other urban development and nature Ministerial order 2000 progress, though 
conservation area’s •	 	Different	other	valuable	natural	habitats	 marine park delayed
have been selected to be protected 
Curacao Land-use plan in place but up for review and Reasonable progress
high development pressure
St. Maarten Aerial and photo documentation •	 	Marine	park	legally	designated Worsened
•	 	Zoning	plan	on	track	expected	at	end	of	
2014
Appendixes | 91

Aichi- Caribbean Indicators used Policy notes and actions Progress 
targets Islands (status and trends)
9.  Invasive Caribbean Inventory invasive alien species (IAS) •	 Strategy	 	on	IAS	being	developed. Big problem, slight 
alien species Netherlands completed. •	 Control	 	lion	fish	by	protected	area	 progress. 
prevented authorities.
and 
Aruba Status inventory of exotic and invasive •	 Lionfish	 	derbies	by	Marine	Park Reasonable progress
controlled
species of the Caribbean Netherlands •	 	Boa	volunteer	Taskforce	(not	active)
•	 Contribution	 	to	Invasive	Alien	Species	
strategy development
Curacao Status inventory of exotic and invasive •	 	Lionfish	control	by	Carmabi	and	divers Delayed
species of the Caribbean Netherlands •	 	Policy	development	advanced
•	 	Participation	in	Invasive	Alien	Species	
Strategy Plan
St. Maarten Status inventory of exotic and invasive •	 Lionfish	 	control	and	information	 Delayed
species of the Caribbean Netherlands campaign by Nature Foundation
•	 P	 articipation	in	Invasive	Alien	Species	
Strategy Plan
10.  Pressure on Caribbean •	 	Waste	water	plant	Bonaire Reasonable progress 
vulnerable Netherlands •	 	Measures	to	decrease	overgrazing but many challenges 
ecosystems •	 Implementation	 	guideline	MARPOL remain.
reduced •	 	Implementation	management	plan	EEZ
•	 Several	 	protection	measures	Saba	bank
Aruba Linear park along the coastline with ecologic, •	 Mangroves	 	in	some	areas	are	conserved	 Worsened
social/recreational and climate adaptation and part of climate adaptations
function •	 Grazing	 	and	erosion	uncontrolled	even	in	
Economic development (more hotels/ Arikok National Park
residential/commercial) •	 	High	levels	of	recreational	disturbance	of	
seabirds and dunes
Curacao Vegetation mapping None Worsened
St. Maarten None None Worsened
Strategic Goal C: To improve the status of biodiversity by safeguarding ecosystems, species and genetic diversity
11. Protected  Caribbean •	 	Protected	terrestrial	and	marine	area.	 Conservation of biodiversity by improved Achieved
areas Netherlands Zoning plans a.o. planning and management of protected 
increased areas and species is one of two main targets 
and of Nature Policy Plan 2013-2017 and 
improved concerns 15 actions.
Marine park for sharks and sea mammals 
foreseen in 2014
Aruba •	 	DCNA	management	success	program Arikok has legal basis since 2000 Delayed
•	 	Important	Bird	Area	designations	IUCN Marine Park Foundation 2010 (no area 
designated)
Parliament accepts motion to protect San 
Nicolas Bay tern islands
Parliament accepts motion to protect various 
Nature areas 2012 
Curacao Monitoring and research DCNA management success program Reasonable progress
Goat eradication
Important Bird Area and RAMSAR 
designations 
Legal conservation areas (EOP)
St. Maarten •	 DCNA	 	management	success	program Legal designation of Marine Park based on Reasonable progress
•	 	Important	Bird	Area	designations	IUCN SPAW implementation
Zoning plan on track
Appendixes | 93

Aichi- Caribbean Indicators used Policy notes and actions Progress 
targets Islands (status and trends)
Strategic Goal E: Enhance implementation through participatory planning, knowledge management and capacity building
17.  NBSAPs Caribbean Nature Policy Plan 2013-2017 adopted in Achieved
adopted as Netherlands 2013
policy 
Aruba As	part	of	the	draft	integrated	nature	and	 Draft	to	be	discussed	in	a	multi-stakeholders	 Reasonable progress
instrument
environment policy meeting in June 2014
Curacao •	 	Several	park	management	plans Delayed
•	 	No	nature	policy	plan
St. Maarten None  •	 Ministerial	 	working	groups	and	 Delayed
commission at work on nature policy 
vision
18. T raditional Caribbean Traditional cultural values taken into account Achieved
knowledge Netherlands to implement nature conservation measures.
respected
Aruba Local community is invited in muIti- •	 	Feedback	incorperated	in	policy	and	 Reasonable progress
stakeholders meetings on nature and environmental bill
environment •	 	WildAruba	Workshop,	participation	of	
local community and NGO’s  
Curacao Inventory of plant medicinal uses (for Reasonable progress
Curacao)
St. Maarten •	 Inventory	 	of	plant	medicinal	uses	(for	   Worsened
Saba)
•	 	Fishers	engaged	for	traditional	knowledge
19.  Knowledge Caribbean •	 	Biological	inventories	nature	NGO’s. •	 Strategic	 	action	within	Nature	policy	plan	 Reasonable progress
improved, Netherlands 2013-2017.
shared and •	 Caribbean	 	Netherlands	Science	Institute	
applied (CNSI) initiated on St. Eustatius.
•	 	Scientific	Research	program	launched	by	
NWO.
•	 	Biodiversity	Monitoring	Strategy	foreseen	
in 2014.
•	 	Dutch	Caribbean	Biodiversity	Database	
under construction.
Aruba •	 	Dutch	Caribbean	Biodiversity	Database	 WildAruba Seminar, dissemination of Reasonable progress
under construction.Only sporadic scientific knowledge on flora and fauna of 
biological studies Aruba
Curacao •	 	Dutch	Caribbean	Biodiversity	Database	 •	 Subsidy	 	to	Carmabi Reasonable progress
under construction.Many natural history •	 DCNA	 	biodiversity	database	project 
studies 
St. Maarten •	 Dutch	 	Caribbean	Biodiversity	Database	   Reasonable progress
under construction.
•	 	Biological	inventories	by	Nature	  
Foundation
•	 	EPIC	bird	monitoring	terrestrial	and	ponds
Appendixes | 95



