 
 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 
7 
The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 
Exploring the future with an ecological-economic simulation model 
 
 
Jorge Amrit Cado van der Lely 
Pieter van Beukering 
Lidia Muresan 
Dario Zambrano Cortes 
Esther Wolfs 
Stijn Schep 
 
 
 
  
Report R12-XX 
02 January 2013 
 
 
 

 
 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 
 
 

 The total economic value of nature on Bonaire  
   
 
    
Contents 
Summary 5	  
List of abbreviations 6	  
Acknowledgements 7	  
1	   Introduction 8	  
2	   Background 10	  
2.1	   Economy and demography 10	  
2.2	   Nature and ecosystems 11	  
2.3	   Threats and impacts 12	  
3	   General Approach and Methodology 15	  
3.1	   Valuation of ecosystem services 15	  
3.2	   Simulation model 15	  
3.3	   Conceptual framework 16	  
3.4	   Ecosystem services and economic benefits 17	  
3.5	   Economic valuation 19	  
3.6	   Intervention methods 20	  
3.7	   Boundaries and limitations 20	  
4	   The Model 22	  
4.1	   Marine Environment Module 22	  
4.2	   Terrestrial Environment Module 25	  
4.3	   Environmental economic module 27	  
5	   Results 32	  
5.1	   Baseline scenario 32	  
5.2	   Scenario 1 – Restoration 38	  
5.3	   Scenario 2 – Conservation 41	  
5.4	   Scenario 3 – Sewage treatment plant 46	  
6	   Conclusions & Recommendations 51	  
6.1	   Validity of the model and lessons to be learned 51	  
6.2	   Total Economic Value versus Total Financial Value 51	  
6.3	   Costs and benefits of environmental measures 51	  
6.4	   Stakeholder engagement 52	  
References 53	  
Annex A	   Nutrients and eutrophication 58	  
Annex B	   Sedimentation 62	  
Annex C	   Physical anthropogenic damage 65	  
Annex D	   Overfishing 69	  
 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 5 
   
 
    
Summary 
Healthy ecosystems such as coral reefs and mangroves are critical to Bonairean society. In the 
last decades, various local and global developments have resulted in serious threats to these 
fragile ecosystems of Bonaire, thereby jeopardizing the foundations of the island’s economy. 
Therefore, it is crucial to understand how nature contributes to Bonaire’s economy and its 
wellbeing in order to make well-founded decisions when managing the economy and nature of 
this beautiful tropical island. This research aims to determine the economic value of the main 
ecosystem services that are provided by the natural resources of Bonaire and their overall 
importance to society. The challenge of this project is to deliver sound scientific insights that will 
guide decision-making regarding the protection of Bonaire’s ecosystems and the management of 
the island’s economy. 
By assigning economic values to the main ecosystem services of Bonaire, this research draws 
attention to the economic benefits of biodiversity and highlights the growing costs of biodiversity 
loss and ecosystem degradation. The study addresses the most relevant ecosystems and 
ecosystem services for Bonaire and applies a range of economic valuation and evaluation tools. 
By surveying over 1,500 persons, including tourists, fishermen, local residents, and citizens of 
the Netherlands, this study estimated the willingness of individuals to pay for the protection of 
Bonairean nature, as well as mechanisms (e.g. user fees) through which such payments would be 
transferred. Furthermore, a scenario analysis is conducted to inform decision makers about the 
most effective strategies to protect the ecosystems of Bonaire. This study intensively involved 
stakeholders from the start to finish, which facilitated data collection while simultaneously 
building capacity in applying the concept of ecosystem services among the target audience. 
In total, more than 10 different ecosystem services have been valued in monetary terms. The total 
economic value (TEV) of the ecosystem services provided by the marine and terrestrial 
ecosystems of Bonaire is $105 million per year. This TEV and its underlying components can be 
used to build a strategy for effective conservation measures on Bonaire. After extensively 
analyzing different scenarios for future ecosystem services values one result becomes very clear: 
an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. In other words, it is more efficient to prevent 
extensive environmental damage than trying to revitalize the environment while there are still 
threats at hand. With the current threats unmanaged, the TEV of Bonairean nature will decrease 
from $105 million today to around $60 million in ten years time and to less than $40 million in 
30 years. The project is well documented and provides several extensive online reports, five 
easily accessible policy briefs and a beautiful film documentary that translates the scientific 
results into real life situations on Bonaire. 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 7 
   
 
    
Acknowledgements 
This study would not have been possible without the support of numerous people and 
organisations on Bonaire. First of all, we want to thank ministry of Economic Affairs, 
Agriculture and Innovation Caribbean Netherlands, especially Hayo Haanstra, Astrid Hilgers, 
Ruth Schipper-Tops and Pieter van Baren for making this research possible in the first place and 
special thanks to Paul Hoetjes, for facilitating the study and for helping us overcome hurdles that 
we encountered during the course of the study. Additionally, we would like to thank the 
Directorate of Spatial Planning and Development, Unit Nature and Environment, especially 
Frank van Slobbe for his valuable input, and special thanks to Boudewijn ‘Bous’ Scholts Carbo 
TTC Inc for validating our report.  Other people that helped us are Kris Kats, Jozef van Brussel 
and Jan Jaap van Almenkerk from ministry of Infrastructure & Environment the Netherlands. A 
special thanks to Danilo Christiaan, Irida, Sue, Stephanie, Carine, Alan and Mikey from 
Mangazina di Rei. A thanks to our artist who draw the beautiful pictures for the Choice 
experiments, Mechtild Thode and a thanks for the support  of her husband Glenn Thode when he 
was the island governor of Bonaire. For the information from the tourism industry a special 
thanks to all businesses that have participated in the business survey and a special thanks to 
Joanny Trinidad and Marjolijn van Kooten TCB and Lara Chirino, Irene Dingjan BONHATA, 
Martien van der Valk Bonaire Hospitality Group and Bonaire Chamber of Commerce, to Tante 
Vita and Papi Cecilia, Bas Noij Bonaire Explorer Association, Bart Snelders CURO. And a very 
special thanks to Corine Gerharts and Jan Baten Bonaire Tours & Vacations and their team for 
their incredible support together with Yvonne and Chris Schultheiss Bonaire Destination Services 
and their team for helping out to collect many cruise passengers data. Also a special thanks to all 
the guides of Sue Felix Archie tours Bonaire. And a thank you to Augusto Montbrun and Paul 
Coolen Buddy Dive resort to show us the coral nursery.  
A thank you to all the people who have supported in collecting data, especially Jan Kloos and 
Rob Sint Jago Island Territory harbour and Hans Voerman Outdoor Bonaire, and Elly Albers 
Mangrove Center. And a thank you to all the fishermen who took the time to talk to us, especially 
Silvio Domacasse, Jason Muller and Pancho Cicilia 
Furthermore special thanks for the support by Erik Meester, Dolfi Debrot and Diana Slijkerman 
IMARES for answering all kinds of ecological questions during our research and delivering us 
data. And thanks for accommodating our students and supporting our meetings by Rita Peachey 
at CIEE Research Station.  
We would also like to express our gratitude towards all the interviewers who made this study 
possible. Thanks to Anna Maira Vaseur, Harrold Vasseur, Timothy Vaseur, Jarelys Cecilia, Janin 
Martes, Vernon Kromhout. 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 9 
   
 
    
Nature indicator Netherlands Mainland Caribbean Netherlands 
2
 12,685 km (is 30% of total 
2
 49.4 km (15.7 % of total area) 
Area of terrestrial nature parks 
area) 
2
 75 km (0.3% of total area) 
2
 2,330 km (is 4% of total 
2
With Sababank = 2,754 km  (11% of 
Area of marine nature parks 
area)*** 
total area) 
Number of animal species* 27,000  2,831**** 
 85**** of which 25 in Caribbean 
 14** 
Number of endemic animal species 
Netherlands 
 3,900  1,259**** 
Number of plant species* 
 0  7****  
Number of endemic plant species 
Sources: Dutch Caribbean Nature Alliance, 2012; Staatsbosbeheer, 2012; WUR, 2012. 
* Note however not all species are known and new species are still being discovered. 
**  www.natuurinformatie.nl names 2 species of sponges and 10 ciliary worms and one mouse subspecie and a 
butterfly. 
***  3 protected areas in the North Sea are in the Exclusive Economic Zone; Vlakte van Raan (17,521 ha), 
2
Voordelta (92,367 ha) and North Sea Coastal Zone (123,134 ha). Total area Dutch North Sea is 57,000 km . 
****  Number of species in Dutch Caribbean (including Aruba, Curacao and St Maarten). 
 
2
This report is structured as follows. Chapter 2 provides important background information about 
the island of Bonaire, including the current ecosystem services found there, a more detailed 
explanation of the current threats on coral reefs as well as the boundaries and limitations of this 
study. Chapter 3 describe the overall context and approach for building the dynamic simulation 
model of coral reefs ecosystem along with their ecological and economic benefits. Chapter 4 
presents a detailed construction of the model and each sub-module. The results obtained for the 
baseline scenario and the three other scenarios are presented in Chapter 5. The conclusions and 
the recommendations are drawn in Chapter 6. 
                                                        
2
  Please note that some of the estimated effects may deviate from the values reported in the individual 
research reports of this overall study on the value of nature of Bonaire. These differences are explained 
by the technical limitations of the model structure as well as the difficulty in coordinating the 
completion of the individual studies and the modelling activities which took place at the same time. 
Overall, these differences do not fundamentally affect the outcome of the model simulations.  
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 11 
   
 
    
 
Figure 2.2 – Contribution of different sectors to Bonaire's GDP in 2008  
Source: CBS, 2010 
Visitors are attracted by the unique combination of terrestrial and marine ecosystems and the 
variety of activities they can enjoy on the island, such as diving, snorkelling, kayaking, 
windsurfing, sailing, bird watching, etc (Info Bonaire, 2012). As a result of the high number of 
visitors, the construction sector almost doubled and there are plans to further increase the number 
of houses and accommodation (Bonaire Department of Physical Planning, 2010).  
2.2 Nature and ecosystems 
The climate of Bonaire is arid tropical, fairly constant throughout the year with low rainfall 
(about 463.3 mm/year registered) and high temperatures during the year, varying between 26.6˚C 
and 28.4˚C (MSNA&A, 2008). This climate allows the existence of large and diverse 
ecosystems, both off and on land. On land Bonaire is characterized by dry forests and off land 
coral reef ecosystems predominate. Of the world’s coral reefs, 8% are located in the Caribbean 
2
Sea and occupy a surface of 26,000 km . On Bonaire the total area covered by corals is 
2
approximately 27 km . Seventy different species of hard corals can be found in the Caribbean, 65 
of which were identified in Bonaire (IUCN, 2011; Alevizon, 2009). Compared to the rest of the 
Caribbean the coral cover of Bonaire is relatively well preserved and represents one of the 
healthiest coral reefs in the Caribbean.  
Bonaire also has a substantial terrestrial ecosystem, which mainly consists out of dry forest. Just 
like the coral reefs so have these dry forests experienced excessive stress. A long history of 
grazing, felling and clearance for cultivation have already destroyed approximately 66% of the 
dry forest in Latin America (Quesada et al 2009). Bonaire is no exception. Trees were felled (in 
particular Haematoxylon brasiletto, Zanthoxylum ﬂavum and Guaiacum ofﬁcinale) throughout 
th
Bonaire in the 17 century and large grazers such as goats, sheep, donkeys, cattle and horses 
th
were introduced and left to roam. Later in the 20 century, extensive deforestation for the 
cultivation of Aloe and the urban expansion for tourist facilities was completed (De Freitas et al 
2005). Today, estimations are that around 30,000 goats are roaming free on the island, most of 
the traditional gardens, Kunukus, a traditional farming system are abandoned, agrarian industry is 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 13 
   
 
    
Over fishing 
Fishing techniques, like the use of explosives and overfishing of specific species, contribute to a 
decline of coral reef over the world (NOAA, 2008). One third of the reefs around Bonaire and 
Curacao are threatened by overfishing (WRI.com). Little information is available about what the 
effects of over fishing might have on species diversity. Nowadays, fishing practices focus on 
smaller predators such as groupers and herbivores like parrotfish (Burkepile & Hay, 2008). Due 
to the lack of herbivorous fish, algae have the possibility to grow unhindered hereby contributing 
even further to the stress corals experience. This makes corals even more vulnerable to diseases 
and death (ICRI; Debrot & Bugter, 2010). High levels of fishing can reduced genetic variation 
(due to specific species being overfished), alter ecological balance on the reef and change trophic 
interactions (McGinley & McClary, 2010; WRI.com). However, since 2004 two FPAs were 
established at the request of BNMP. These two areas represent 4 km of a no-take zone (The 
Nature Conservancy, 2012).  
Physical destruction 
The tourism sector represents a threat to the marine ecosystems of Bonaire. Due to the activities 
performed by tourists, such as diving and snorkeling, approximately 2.7% coral reefs are 
damaged every year (De Meyer, 1998). These activities have a direct impact on corals as a result 
of their direct contact or illegal anchoring (WRI.com). Since 1994 tourist’s number increased 
from 57,000 to approximately 70,000 (TCB, 2010). However, the physical destruction of coral 
reef remained stable. This is a result of the educational and awareness programs on coral fragility 
(De Meyer, 1998).   
Sedimentation 
Sedimentation is mainly caused by the dredging associated with construction of different types of 
buildings and development of infrastructure. As an impact, the sediments released in water can 
affect the food web by killing the corals and other organisms essential for fish. Sediments also 
reduce the photosynthetic activity and light availability, and in high amounts they can even bury 
the reefs (Roger, 1990; Wieggers, 2011). The issue of sedimentation began with the expansion of 
tourists since 1994 (De Meyer, 1998; Harty, 2011). More tourists triggered a higher coastal and 
marine development which caused high levels of sediments being released into the water. 
Furthermore, deforestation and overall decline in terrestrial ecosystem has attenuated the capacity 
of the forest to prevent sediment run off.  
Nutrients 
Coral reef systems are characterized by oligotrophic conditions. It is in these conditions that 
corals have a competitive advantage. However, superfluous amounts of Nitrogen (N) and 
phosphorous (P) of anthropogenic origin, result in eutrophic coastal waters. Such conditions are 
favourable for algae and allow them to out-compete coral for space (Wieggers, 2011). The 
sewage water of Bonaire is collected in septic tanks and leaches into the sea through groundwater 
without being treated properly. In their paper, Kekem et al (2006) mentioned the main reason for 
coral reef decline to be the inflow of partly untreated surface and subsurface water. The faeces of 
free roaming live stock (e.g. goats and donkeys) also represent a source of nutrients (Kekem et 
al., 2006). Since Bonaire never had a sewage treatment plant it has become an important source 
of stress for corals. Especially now as the number of tourists increased and the concentration of 
nutrients entering coastal waters with it. A study done by Dailer et al. (2012) for Hawaii analyzed 
the effect of N and P on diverse species of algae, using different concentrations of nutrients. The 
outcome of this study revealed that the growth rate of algae increases with the percentage of 
wastewater affluent added.  
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 15 
   
 
    
3 General Approach and Methodology 
3.1 Valuation of ecosystem services 
Nature provides a wide range of benefits to people. For millennia, human beings have benefitted 
from some processes intrinsic to the functioning of ecosystems worldwide. These ecosystems 
generate a range of goods and services that support human well-being and generate economic 
benefits, collectively termed ecosystem services. The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MA 
2005) introduced the concept of ecosystem services on the global agenda, recognizing four 
categories of services: supporting (e.g. nutrient cycling, soil formation and primary production), 
provisioning (e.g. food, freshwater, wood and fibre and fuel), regulating (e.g. climate regulation, 
flood and disease regulation and water purification), and cultural (aesthetic, spiritual, educational 
and recreational). Globally, about 30 million people depend entirely on coral reefs for their 
livelihood (NOAA, 2011). 
Despite the fact that many people benefit from the ecosystem services, individuals or groups 
usually have insufficient incentives to maintain the natural capital, compromising ecosystems for 
continued provisioning of benefits (TEEB, 2010). Usually the flow of services and goods from 
nature to humans is undervalued by governments, businesses and the public and is only 
considered once they have been lost. Changes in ecosystems and the services they provide have 
impact on human welfare and wellbeing. These changes, be they intentional or accidental, affect 
provisioning, regulating, habitat and cultural services. By analysing how these changes affect the 
values of ecosystem services thus provide information on how to manage the environment. 
Furthermore it provides a means to communicate the value of ecosystem services in a 
comprehensive, objective and logical manner to all relevant stakeholders. 
In order to help policy makers make comprehensive decisions concerning the management of 
ecosystem services, a series of steps must be taken.  
1. The ecosystem services within the study area must be defined. What are economical and 
ecological benefits and goods delivered and provided by the ecosystem?  
2. The relationship between the ecosystem services and the ecosystem must be defined. Which 
aspect of the ecosystem delivers the goods and services? This relationship provides insight 
into which ecological/biological parameters are of importance for the provision of the 
ecosystem services and goods. For example, in order for the fishers to prolong their practice 
they need to be able to catch fish. Thus the service would be defined as “fish” and the 
ecological parameter associated with this service would be “fish biomass” or “fish stock”.  
3. Define the factors that influence the capacity of the ecosystem to provide the service or 
good. Returning to the previous example, “fish stock” is influenced by factors such as: 
fishing rate and other anthropogenic stressors (pollution, destruction of habitat etc), 
predation, availability of food, growth rate fish and reproduction rate fish.  
4. Identify different interventions, each of which should elicit and highlight a different aspect, 
hereby juxtaposing the status quo, ecological orientated interventions and economical 
orientated interventions. Choosing a set of different interventions will provide insight in how 
they influence the ecosystem and thus, the ecosystem services and goods.  
3.2 Simulation model 
The functioning of ecosystems, its delivery of services and the final contribution to welfare is 
complex. To effectively evaluate the complex interface between ecological and economic 
processes, simulation modelling can play a useful role representing the main ecological functions 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 17 
   
 
    
potential intervention measures and estimates their influence on ecological conditions and its 
subsequent impact on the economic value of nature. This value is compared to the TEV of the 
baseline scenario. Step 6 compares the costs and benefits of each management option and 
calculates the net present value (NPV) the management interventions.  
Step	  1:	  Ecological	  
Ecosystems	  &	  
description
Ecosystem	  Functions
Marine	  &	  
Terrestrial	  
effects
Ecosystem	  services	  to:
Step	  2:	  Economic	  
valuation
Tourism,	  Real	  estate,	  Culture,	  Fisheries,	  Non-­‐use,	  etc.
Step	  4:	  Simulate	  
Total	  Economic	  
effects	  of	  	  baseline	  
Value &	  intervention
Endogenous	  
Step	  3:	  Threats	  
&	  exogenous	  
analysis
threats
Step	  5:	  Define	  
Management	  
intervention
intervention
Benefits	  of	   Costs	  of	  
intervention intervention
Step	  6:	  Evaluate	  
Net	  present	  
effectiveness	  of	  
value
intervention
 
Figure 3.1 General Framework of the dynamic simulation model 
3.4 Ecosystem services and economic benefits 
Ecosystems generate a range of goods and services, known as benefits for Bonaire's society. As 
mentioned in Cesar et al (2002), goods provided by an ecosystem can be seen as renewable and 
non-renewable. Renewable goods can be lumber, fish or seaweed, and non-renewable goods are 
represented by sand and corals extracted and used as building materials. Coral reefs, for example, 
also provide a range of services such as: physical structure services for coastal protection (CP), 
biotic services within and between ecosystems for maintaining the habitat, bio-geo-chemical 
services for nitrogen fixation and CO control, information services for climate and pollution 
2
control and social and cultural services for tourism, recreation and cultural values (Cesar et al, 
2002). According to MEA (2005), the benefits of coral reefs for people are divided in different 
categories as represented in Table 3.1. 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 19 
   
 
    
Total	  Economic	  
Value	  (TEV)
Use	   Non-­‐use	  
Values Values
Direct	  Use	   Indirect	  Use	   Option	   Bequest	   Use	  
Values Values Values Values Values
Example: Example: Example: Example: Example:
-­‐Timber,	   -­‐coastal	   -­‐Genetic	   -­‐Avoided	   -­‐Existence	  of	  
fisheries,	   protection,	   materials	  for	   damage	  climate	   endangered	  and	  
aquarium	  trade, aesthetic	  beauty	   pharmaceutical	   change	  for	  future	   nearly	  extinct	  
ornaments for	  real	  estate purposes generations species
 
Figure 3.2 The TEV of an ecosystem 
3.5 Economic valuation 
To determine the TEV of nature both primary and secondary data are collected. As part of this 
study, these ecosystem services are measured through a range of valuation techniques (see Table 
3.2). Market price represents the value at which a certain good or service is bought and sold in 
commercial markets (van Beukering et al, 2007b). Contingent valuation method estimate the 
value of an ecosystem service using surveys and asking people about their WTP for a specific 
service (van Beukering et al, 2007b). Hedonic pricing approximates the economic value of 
environmental services that affects market price, especially the housing price (van Beukering et 
al, 2007b). Houses at risk method estimates value of ecosystem services based on the costs of 
avoiding damages as a result of lost service (van Beukering et al, 2007b). The services analysed 
in this report are explained in detail in the next Chapter.  
Table 3.2 Techniques used to valuate goods and services provided by coral reefs 
Goods and Services Valuation Technique 
Tourism & recreation Market price & Choice experiment 
Non-use values Contingent valuation method & Choice experiment 
Fisheries Market price & Choice experiment 
Amenity Hedonic pricing 
Coastal protection Avoided damage cost 
Agriculture & livestock Market pricing 
Medicinal & pharmaceutical Market pricing 
Carbon sequestration Market pricing 
Research value Net factor income approach 
Art value Net factor income approach 
 
The TEV is calculated by summing up all the aforementioned values represented in Table 3.2. On 
a global scale the net benefits of coral reefs were determined to be around $30 billion per year 
(Cesar, Burke and Pet-Soede, 2003). The largest share of this is attributed to tourism and 
recreation with $10 billion, followed by coastal protection with $9 billion. For Guam, the TEV of 
coral reef was determined to be $127.3M per year, with 75% contributing the tourism sector (van 
Beukering et al, 2007a). The TEV of Hawaii coral reefs per year was determined as well by 
Cesar et al (2002). This was calculated to be $364M and the NPV equals $9.722M at 3% 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 21 
   
 
    
Regarding the data used, not everything is easily available making it difficult to have detailed and 
complete information necessary to operate the ecological-economic simulation model. Since 
reliable and long-term ecological data of the island is scarce, providing a well founded baseline 
has proven to be difficult. Moreover, due to different groups which analyzed these ecosystems 
over time, some of the data are available only for specific locations of the island and for specific 
moments in history. To overcome this problem it was necessary at times to extrapolate data.  
In some cases, data was unavailable because accessibility was denied. This is often the case when 
a report is published by the private sector or by specific government departments. Governments 
are not always willing to share their data. As a result, proxy data from other studies was used. 
This data was acquired from studies with similar ecosystems on other islands, such as Hawaii, 
USVI or Guam.  
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 23 
   
 
    
There is a direct competition between corals and algae for the same space (Vermeij et al, 2010; 
McClanahan-1995; Edwards et al, 2010). After years of research, evidence was gathered to prove 
that corals are affected by algae as a result of algal release of organic carbon that increases the 
local activity of microbes (Barott et al, 2011). Algae abundance threatens the existence of coral 
reefs due to their capacity to overgrow or block corals space, hampering their growth and 
expansion. According to Box & Mumby (2007), macro-algae and turf algae cause hypoxia on 
coral tissues, reduce coral fecundity and inhibit larval settlement.  
Fish Stock and Fish Diversity 
Fish biomass and fish diversity are important parameters for Bonaire's inhabitants as they 
represent a source of food and income. In the model a distinction is made between herbivore and 
predator fish species. A study conducted by IUCN (2011) in different locations in Bonaire 
2
discovered the average biomass for herbivore fish to be 7,319 g/100m , while for predators this 
2
was 5,290 g/100m . The total biomass of fish was calculated to be 3,404 tonnes, which is the sum 
of predator and herbivore species extrapolated over the entire BNMP.  
The increase in fish stock is influenced by their reproduction rate. Myers et al (1999) calculated 
the maximum reproduction rate of different fish species to vary between 1 and 7. Because 
Bonaire has approximately 450 fish species, the maximum reproduction rate was considered to 
be 0.35. The maximum carrying capacity for the fish stock was calculated to be equal with 5,600 
tonnes, by taking into account the maximum amount of fish found by IUCN (2011) in diverse 
locations of Bonaire. 
An assumption was made for the maximum increase in fish diversity. As no data were found 
about this subject it was assumed that if no external factors are present the rate of expansion in 
the number of species is 0.04% per year. However, like the other indicators the fish stock is also 
threatened by diverse factors, such as overfishing and the presence of lionfish (Dew, 2001). 
Herbivore fish are a threat to algae cover due to their diet formed by algae and sea grass. In one 
of their studies, Newman et al (2006) and Edwards et al (2010) demonstrated that there is a 
negative and linear relation between herbivorous fish biomass and algae biomass. Mumby et al 
(2006) revealed that parrotfish can graze a maximum of 30% of the seabed in 6 months, meaning 
a maximum of 60% of algae being grazed in one year. As the herbivore fish present in the water 
of Bonaire are not just parrotfish, the maximum algae decrease at the carrying capacity for 
herbivore fish was established to be 50%. 
Nutrients 
Groundwater represents the source of nutrients loaded into the sea. The major causes of nutrient 
enrichment in Bonaire are improper land use such as uncontrolled coastal development and the 
lack of a sewage treatment plant (Slijkerman et al, 2011). Untreated sewage consists of high 
amounts of nitrogen and phosphorus, important nutrients which contribute to sea water 
6
eutrophication , coral reefs degradation and a decrease in coral species (Kekem et al, 2006). The 
average concentration of inorganic nitrogen (NH4+NO3 + NO2) in Bonaire waters was measured 
by Slijkerman et al (2011) to have a value of 1.51±1.36µM. In their study about economic 
valuation of Hawaiian reefs, Cesar et al (2002) revealed the following equations for calculating 
the total decrease of coral cover and coral diversity due to the concentration of nutrients loaded. 
!".!∗!"#$%&'#(   !"
(1) !"#$%  !"#$%  !"#$"%&"  !"#  !"  !"#$%&'#(= 
!"
!".!∗!"#$%&'#(   !"
(2) !"#$%  !"#$%&"'(  !"#$"%&"  !"#  !"  !"#$%&'#(= 
!"
                                                        
6
  Eutrophication represents the process by which a high concentration of nutrients is loaded in water and 
produce excessive growth of algae. Once the algae decompose they occupy the surface of the water 
depleting the oxygen and causing death to other organisms such as corals and fish (Art, 1993).   
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 25 
   
 
    
An important relation in this model is the balance between corals, algae and uncovered substrate 
(e.g. rubble and sand). Together these three components comprise the surface area of the coastal 
waters of Bonaire, i.e. 2,700 ha (Holmes & Johnstone, 2010). A decline in coral cover gives the 
opportunity for algae to expand their surface. All the above mentioned parameters are collected 
and transformed into one indicator which reflects the general state of the coral reef ecosystem. To 
calculate the state of the coral reef ecosystem, a common indicator with values between 0 (fully 
degraded ecosystem) and 1 (pristine ecosystem) was built following the next three steps:  
• First, for every indicator the rate of their presence was calculated by dividing their present 
amount (t or %) to their maximum possible amount.  
• Second, according to their importance, each indicator was assigned with different scores, 
as follows: coral cover-0.3, coral biodiversity-0.3, fish stock-0.15, fish biodiversity-0.15, 
and algae cover-0.1. The scores were taken from Cesar et al (2002), and are based on 
expert opinions. 
• Finally, in order to calculate the state of the reef, each score was multiplied with their 
corresponding existence rate and the results were summed up. The total sum was divided 
by the sum of the scores, which in this case is equal with 1, obtaining the value of coral 
reef quality. Once the state of the reef is defined, the next step is to calculate the total 
economic value of the coral reef which is in part influenced by the reef's quality. 
4.2 Terrestrial Environment Module 
Little is known about the tropical dry forest (TDF) ecology on Bonaire. Studies of abandoned 
lands have shown that the tropical dry forest regenerates fast, reaching a maximum of basal area 
2
of 25m per ha and the maximum of 25 species per plot between 30 and 40 years (Figure 4.1). 
Coppicing from stumps and roots remaining after disturbance is considered as the primary 
regeneration mechanism of disturbed tropical dry sites (Quesada et al 2009). Seed dispersal by 
wind is important for regeneration. The pioneer species within abandoned lands are wind 
dispersers plants like the Yellow Poui and Kapok, that function as nursery trees for other species 
accelerating the transition to primary forest (Aide et al 2000).  
Plant-animal interactions in the tropical dry forest are extremely important for conserving the 
plants, animals and genetic diversity of the forest. It is estimated that 54–80% of the tropical dry 
forest plant species rely on animal vectors for its pollination, such as bats and the hummingbirds 
(Machado and Lopes, 2004). This interaction is crucial for the cacti Kadushi, Agave, Kalbas and 
Kapok which are important diets of the aforementioned animals. Seed dispersal by birds and bats 
is also important. Animal dispersed species in the dry forest are estimated between 43%-64% of 
the plant species within the forest (Quesada et al 2009). Changes in animal communities during 
succession undoubtedly affect seeds arriving to areas undergoing succession and ultimately the 
emerging succession of the forest, making seed dispersal important for plants such as the 
medicinal tree Wayaká and the Cactus Kadushi. Absence of such interactions may trigger a 
cascading effect, affecting plant density and reducing pollination (Traveset and Richardson 2006, 
Anderson et al 2011). 
The ecological module aims to reflect the mentioned ecological characteristics of the tropical dry 
forest including a fast regeneration, early maturity, and facilitated regeneration by seed dispersal 
and pollination by bats and birds. For the terrestrial environment there are 3 ecological indicators 
taken into account, i.e. Animal occurrence, Plant diversity and Plant Cover. These are explained 
in the following. 
Mature & Degraded Forests 
According to De Freitas et al (2005) little remains of the original mature forest on Bonaire 
because the extremely degraded state and the unknown composition of the flora before colonial 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 27 
   
 
    
attraction after disturbance. For example, recovery from visitor impacts, might be relatively quick 
for tracks in some forest compared to the more sustained and permanent alterations of visitor 
impacts in low energy cave ecosystems (Cigna, 1993). 
Animal Occurrence 
A function was included that represents the amount of animals occurring on the island. This was 
done in order to account for the negative effect of tourism and other potential disturbances on the 
abundance of birds. Occurrence is an independent parameter that refers how often a bird is 
sighted regardless the species. Unfortunately the lack of ornithological surveys leave to raw 
assumptions the number of individuals per species of birds or bats found on a period of time. A 
linear relationship is assumed with a maximum of 80 species. If tourism numbers exceed 650,000 
a minimum of 1 is reached. At the current amount of tourists, the amount of species is 80. In 
order to represent the threat of grazing on the plant richness a function is included that when 
grazing is bigger than Bonaire’s carrying capacity the plant richness drops substantially.  
Terrestrial Indicator 
The sub-indicators ‘plant richness’, ‘animal occurrence’ and ‘animal richness’ jointly constitute 
the terrestrial indicator. The indicator summarizes the quality of the terrestrial environment of 
Bonaire and indirectly also affects the visitation of tourists to Bonaire. The indicator ranges from 
0 (highly degraded) to 1(very good state). All three components of the “Terrestrial State 
Indicator” are normalized in order to sum all of them (i.e. for each of the functions the minimum 
is converted to 0 and the maximum to 1). To show how different environmental attributes 
influence the environmental quality and hence the “Terrestrial State Indicator” in different ways, 
a weight was applied to each normalized value. 
4.3 Environmental economic module 
Economic module consist of tourism, non-use, biodiversity, fisheries, amenity and coastal 
protection sub-modules. These main sectors of the economic sub-model are explained in the 
following.  
Tourism and recreation 
Tourists are the major contributors to the total recreational value of coral reefs, followed in a 
small part by locals. Tourism industry represents the main pillar of economic development of 
Bonaire (Groenenboom & Krul, 2009). There are three types of tourists: stay-over tourists (SOT) 
and cruise tourists (CT) and yacht tourists. All three types contribute to the recreational value of 
coral reefs. SOTs arrive by planes or yachts and spend a few days on the island, and CT arrive by 
cruise boat and spend just a few hours on the island. SOT tourists generate direct revenues by 
paying the fee for recreational activities such as diving and snorkeling, and indirect revenues 
through hotel and food costs. CT only produce direct revenues through expenses they have on 
diverse activities and souvenirs they buy. Moreover, locals contribute as well to the TEV of coral 
reef by providing direct revenues through recreational activities they undertake such as 
snorkeling and diving. However, tourism has not only positive sides. It represents also a threat 
though waste disposal and physical destruction of corals while diving. For more information on 
the international tourism value of nature on Bonaire, read Schep et al. (2012a). The local 
recreational values are estimated in Lacle et al. (2012). 
In the last 10 years the number of tourists has increased considerably. In 2011, the number of 
SOT is 74,342 and CT are 229,228 (CTO, 2011). Through the expenses on the island they 
contribute to the economy of Bonaire. SOTs bring revenues to the island as a result of their direct 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 29 
   
 
    
Fishing activities are defined by their purpose: commercial fishing, subsistence fishing, aquarium 
fishing, and recreational fishing. For the Bonaire case study, only commercial and recreational 
fishing are incorporated in the analysis because there is hardly any information about subsistence 
and aquarium fishing. To calculate the fishery related values of coral reefs of Bonaire the 
following steps were followed. First, the total revenues from fish sales are calculated. The fishing 
rate on Bonaire was established to be 1.8% of the total stock (Schep et al, 2012a). This number 
represents the fishing rate on reef related fish. Fish are sold at an average price of 6.95 USD per 
kg. Although only about 70% of the fish caught are sold, all fish caught are ascribed to the 
fisheries value. This is because the remaining 30% of the fish caught are consumed by the 
fishermen and therefore also add to the welfare of Bonaire citizens. Second, the cost for fishing 
was calculated by multiplying the average cost for boat maintenance with the total number of 
boats (18 small boats and 12 larger boats). Third, the profit of fishermen was calculated by 
extracting the costs from the total revenues. Finally, the entire value is ascribed to the corals as 
all fishing takes place within the reef habitat. 
Amenity value 
The presence of houses on the coast near coral reefs is a factor that contributes to the value of the 
house. A beautiful view with healthy coral reefs increases the price of the house with a certain 
percentage. On the opposite, damaged corals will decrease house price, as the amount of algae is 
going to increase and with their disintegration will trigger a bad smelling and unpleasant view. 
As a result, the value added to the average house price as a result of coral reefs existence 
represents the value placed on their existence and it is called the amenity value (Bervoets et al, 
2010). For more information on this amenity ecosystem services of nature for the real estate 
industry of Bonaire, read Van Beukering and Wolfs (2012). 
The amenity value is calculated on the basis of the number of houses sold and the nature-related 
value of houses, which is partly are influenced by the state of the marine and terrestrial 
environment. The average price of a house and the average number of houses sold influenced by 
the world GDP, were defined by analyzing their values in the last 8 years and establishing the 
following relations between them. The influence of reefs' quality on the price of a house was 
defined by Cesar et al (2002) who mention that a presence of coral cover between 10 to 50% 
change the house price with 1.3% following a S shape. As mentioned in Cesar et al (2002), from 
the total value of houses sold, around 1.5% is considered to be the amenity value of coral reefs. 
Coastal protection 
Coral reefs provide coastal protection and as a result they have the capacity to dissipate wave 
energy and protect the shoreline against storms, hurricanes and erosion. Healthy coral reefs 
prevent damage to the infrastructure and houses developed on coast during extreme events. Due 
to their structure, corals act as wave breakers mitigating the impact of waves and protecting the 
properties placed on the coast. Coral reefs protect the shoreline within 2,000m and represent 29% 
of the Caribbean coastline (van Beukering et al, 2007b).  
To value this function it is necessary to know how the absence of coral reefs will influence the 
value of houses and infrastructure and the necessary costs to prevent shoreline damage, by 
constructing wave breakers or providing coastal nourishment. In this simulation model the 
coastal protection value of coral reefs is calculated through assessing the damage cost avoided to 
the properties close to the coast in case of no coral existence. For more information on the coastal 
protection value of coral reefs of Bonaire, check Van Zanten et al. (2012). 
Livestock and Agricultural Value 
The terrestrial value of nature on Bonaire is partly determined by the benefits that the agricultural 
sector gains from the presence of abundant vegetation. The structure of the livestock and 
agricultural module is pretty straightforward. The annual value of livestock is the sum of the 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 31 
   
 
    
this study, we aim to value the climate regulation potential of Bonaire. This desk study has made 
a rough attempt to estimate the carbon sequestration value of the main ecosystems of Bonaire on 
the basis of actual carbon market prices. For more information on carbon sequestering ecosystem 
services of nature of Bonaire, read Van Beukering and Wolfs (2012). 
Art value  
Artists are inspired by their surroundings. Such is also the case on Bonaire, where the natural 
scenery of the island stimulates artists to use components of nature in their work. Clearly, nature 
plays a crucial role in the production process of art on Bonaire. The demand for art consists of the 
thousands and thousands of tourists visiting the island, who are keen to bring home a piece of art 
to remember the beauty of the island upon their return. Moreover, the beautiful photographs and 
books produced on Bonaire are distributed to clients across the world. Given the explicit demand 
and supply of art on Bonaire and its strong dependence on nature, the art sector on Bonaire plays 
an important role in the overall economy and provides an additional reason to manage nature well 
on the island. For more information on this art value of nature of Bonaire, read Van Beukering 
and Wolfs (2012). 
 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 33 
   
 
    
4000	   460	  
3500	   450	  
3000	   440	  
2500	   430	  
2000	   420	  
1500	   410	  
1000	   400	  
500	   390	  
0	   380	  
2010	   2020	   2030	   2040	   2050	   2010	   2020	   2030	   2040	   2050	  
Year	   Year	  
  
Figure 5.1 Fish stock (t) and fish diversity variation in time for the baseline scenario 
As of 2012, the benthic cover is dominated by algae with 42.6% coverage, followed by corals, 
28.6% (IUCN, 2011). If all values and their interaction will suffer no change in the following 30 
years, the benthic cover will experience a drastic decline, as shown in Figure 5.2. The algae cover 
will constantly expand and remain constant at around 62%. After 10 years, all of the coral present 
will have declined to a minimum of 5%. This minimum represents the cover of corals in the deep 
reefs (20-40m). At these depths corals are less influenced by the harmful disturbances such as 
pollutants or physical destruction. By the year 2023, 5% of benthic cover is occupied by corals. 
The reason for such a rapid decline is in part due to a decline of herbivorous fish. Such fish are 
important in keeping algae populations from over growing fringing corals. Also ambient nutrient 
concentrations in the water provide excellent conditions for algae to flourish. This means that 
algae have a competitive advantage when competing for space with corals. The algae have no 
grazers preventing them from overgrowing the algae, and the high nutrient concentrations in the 
water elevate growth rates. The result, coastal waters that are almost completely devoid of coral 
cover.  
100%	  
90%	  
80%	  
70%	  
60%	  
Sand	  and	  Dead	  Coral	  (%)	  
50%	  
40%	  
Algae	  Cover	  (%)	  
30%	  
Coral	  Cover	  (%)	  
20%	  
10%	  
0%	  
0	   5	   10	   15	   20	   25	   30	  
Year	  
 
Figure 5.2 Variation in benthic cover for the baseline scenario 
 
 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 
%	  	  Cover	  
Fish	  Abundance	  (tons)	  
Number	  of	  Fish	  Species	  

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 35 
   
 
    
300000	  
250000	  
200000	  
Stay	  Over	  
Tourists	  	  
150000	  
Cruise	  Tourists	  	  
100000	  
50000	  
0	  
2010	   2020	   2030	   2040	   2050	  
Year	  
 
Figure 5.4 Change in the number of tourists for the baseline scenario 
The biodiversity value is determined by summing the research, medicinal and bio-prospecting 
value. Figure 5.5 illustrates the variation of these values over the studied time period. There are 
different factors that contribute to the variation in the biodiversity value. First, due to a decrease 
in coral cover and mature forest, the chances of finding medicinal plants declines. However, 
since the population size of Bonaire is expected to increase so will the number of people 
benefiting from the biodiversity services. Therefore, the medicinal value of the forests increases 
as the population increases. This value is calculated by the amount of money is saved by not 
visiting a doctor and instead using medicinal plants found in the forest.  
2,40	  
2,35	  
2,30	  
2,25	  
2,20	  
2,15	  
2,10	  
2,05	  
2,00	  
2010	   2015	   2020	   2025	   2030	   2035	   2040	   2045	  
Years	  
 
Figure 5.5 Change of the Biodiversity Value for the baseline scenario 
The existence of a high diversity of flora and fauna in both marine and terrestrial ecosystems also 
generates economic benefits by means of non use values. The aesthetic values of the ecosystems 
are part of non use benefits people obtain through spiritual enrichment, cognitive development, 
reflection and aesthetic experiences. Many people find beauty or aesthetic value in various 
aspects of ecosystems, as reflected in the support for parks, scenic drives, and the selection of 
housing locations and enjoyment of scenery. The WTP of Dutch households to preserve nature 
declines as the state of the reef and forest declines. In a report by van Beukering et al (2012) the 
willingness to pay for the preservation of Bonaire’s nature is presented. During the next 30 years 
as a result of coral reef and forest degradation it is assumed that the WTP of Dutch citizens to 
improve Bonaires nature quality will decrease. After 30 years the WTP of Dutch households will 
have decreased from $61 million to $26 million per year (Figure 5.6). The WTP for locals 
decreases as this value also depends on the state of the reef and forest. 
 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 
Tourists	  (#)	  
USD	  (in	  millions)	  

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 37 
   
 
    
presence of corals. With a once in every 30 years hurricane frequency and a damage of 16.6% to 
the total house value, the coastal protection value of coral reefs will decline from $2.93 million to 
$2.85 million in 30 years. The reason for this decrease is the decline in the general state of the 
reef. Since the overall capacity for corals in Bonaire to mitigate damage on coastal infrastructure 
and housing small, the coastal protection value declines very little. Furthermore, it is also the 
dead coral that buffer incoming waves and thus help mitigate damage to coastal infrastructure.  
5.1.3 Total economic value  
In order to define the TEV of Bonaire’s coral reef, the final step is to sum all the benefits which 
were determined in the previous steps. Figure 5.8 show the decline of the TEV, from 105 million 
USD to 37 million USD in 30 years. The TEV eventually levels out at the 37 million marker, as 
this is where the reef and forest state reach their collective minima. Figure 5.9 shows the 
composition of the TEV of nature of Bonaire. The non-use value contributes the most (63%) 
followed by the tourism and recreational value (265).  
120	  
100	  
80	  
60	  
40	  
20	  
0	  
2010	   2015	   2020	   2025	   2030	   2035	   2040	   2045	  
Years	  
 
Figure 5.8 The Total Economic Value of the Bonaire’s ecosystem services 
1%	   1%	  
0,27%	  
RecreaFonal	  Value	  
5%	  
Biodiversity	  
26%	  
Non	  Use	  	  
Amenity	  
4%	  
Coastal	  ProtecFon	  
63%	  
Livestock	  &	  Agriculture	  
Fisheries	  
 
Figure 5.9 The share of each value contributing to the TEV in the baseline scenario 
All the aforementioned values are presented without taking a discount rate into account. Figure 
5.10 depicts the net present values of Bonaire’s nature at different discount rates, ranging from 
0% to 15%. The NPV varies between $1.7 billion and $626 million over a 30-year period. 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 
USD	  (in	  millions)	  

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 39 
   
 
    
100%	  
90%	  
80%	  
70%	  
60%	  
Sand	  and	  Dead	  Coral	  (%)	  
50%	  
40%	  
Algae	  Cover	  (%)	  
30%	  
Coral	  Cover	  (%)	  
20%	  
10%	  
0%	  
0	   5	   10	   15	   20	   25	   30	  
Year	  
 
Figure 5.11 Variation in Benthic cover for the restoration scenario 
After 30 years the fish abundance for the interventions resulted in a fish stock of 1,571 tonnes, 
this is 150 tons more than in the baseline scenario. The artificial reefs provide some extra habitat, 
and a place where fish can avoid predation. Despite these efforts however fish abundance 
declines because lionfish still predominate throughout coastal waters. This results in a decline of 
fish abundance. The same can be said about fish biodiversity. 
The most distinct difference between the two scenarios is in the level of forest cover (see Figure 
5.12). Active reforestation is causing the mature forests to decline at a slower rate when 
compared to the baseline scenario. Despite the intervention, after 20 years, mature forest cover 
will be completely absent on the island. Free roaming livestock are the main reason for this 
decline.  
6000	  
5000	  
4000	  
Baseline	  
3000	  
RestoraFon	  
2000	  
1000	  
0	  
2010	   2020	   2030	   2040	   2050	  
Year	  
 
Figure 5.12  Comparison in forest cover for the baseline and restoration scenario  
As shown in Figure 5.13, the interventions that were proposed in the restoration scenario have 
little effect. The indicator follows the same trend as in the baseline scenario. The marine indicator 
follows the same trend as in the baseline scenario. The interventions had a marginal influence on 
the qualitative state of the reef. Similarly, the terrestrial indicator follows the same trend, except 
that its value is slightly higher. This is because from the onset, in the model it was presumed that 
more land use was allocated to mature forest cover. In total 4,000 ha that was previously used for 
agriculture is now presumed to be used for natural forest growth. This means that the value of the 
forest indicator has a higher value, but follows the same trend as in the baseline scenario. Despite 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 
	  %	  Cover	  
Amount	  of	  Forest	  (hectare)	  

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 41 
   
 
    
The sum of all the different values in this scenario reflects the same trend as seen in the baseline 
scenario. It starts off at 105 million USD and drops to a value of $38 million (Figure 5.15). 
Despite investments in the restoration, the net benefits are barely visible. This is because the 
restoration efforts were inept at reversing the declining quality of the environment.  
120	  
100	  
80	  
60	  
RestoraFon	  
40	  
20	  
0	  
2010	   2020	   2030	   2040	   2050	  
Years	  
 
Figure 5.15 Variation in the TEV for the restoration scenario over time 
When a closer look is taken at the intervention costs and the economic benefits, it becomes 
apparent that what at first glance appears like an investment with a very low yield, actually 
resulted in some profit. The costs of the interventions amount to $140,000 annually for the first 
two years. After the initial investments, the maintenance costs of the artificial reefs, continuous 
reforestation efforts and the coral nursery program sum up to an annual costs of $98,000. The net 
benefits were calculated for the restoration scenario with respect to the baseline scenario. The net 
benefits represent the sum of TEV over a 30 year period for different discount rates. In order to 
obtain the cost benefit ratio, the net benefits were then divided by the intervention costs (Figure 
5.16). Overall, the benefits exceed the costs. Only at a discount rate of 15% do the costs exceed 
the benefits. The interventions that were simulated in this scenario are profitable. This can mainly 
be ascribed to a non-use value worth $7 million more and the tourism and recreational value 
worth $2 million more than in the baseline scenario.  
4	  
3	  
2	  
1	  
0	  
0%	   1%	   2%	   3%	   4%	   5%	   6%	   7%	   8%	   9%	  10%	  11%	  12%	  13%	  14%	  
-­‐1	  
Discount	  Rate	  
-­‐2	  
 
Figure 5.16 The cost benefit ratio for the restoration scenario. 
5.3 Scenario 2 – Conservation 
The environment of Bonaire is highly threatened by the presence of lionfish and free roaming 
livestock. This Conservation Scenario aims at solving this problem of invasive species by. 
1) Controlling livestock on the island: In this conservation scenario it is assumed that of the 
30,000 goats that still roam free in the baseline scenario, only 1,000 still do after 30 years. 
The remaining livestock is fenced and do not have the opportunity to forage on young flora. 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 
USD	  (in	  millions)	  
Beneﬁt	  cost	  raGo	  

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 43 
   
 
    
100%	  
90%	  
80%	  
70%	  
60%	  
Sand	  and	  Dead	  Coral	  (%)	  
50%	  
40%	  
Algae	  Cover	  (%)	  
30%	  
Coral	  Cover	  (%)	  
20%	  
10%	  
0%	  
0	   5	   10	   15	   20	   25	   30	  
Year	  
 
Figure 5.18 Variation in benthic cover for the conservation scenario 
The effects of fencing the free roaming livestock are most apparent when looking at the forest 
cover (Figure 5.19). The results of the simulation show that in this scenario, the amount of 
mature forest cover reaches high numbers. Goat removal was implemented in stages in the 
model, hence there first is a small decline forest cover as free roaming livestock still predominate 
throughout the island. However, after 4 years goat numbers decrease to such a level that forests 
have the chance to mature. From 2017 and onwards, the mature forest cover keeps on increasing. 
After 30 years mature forest cover amounts to 7,500 hectare.  
8000	  
7000	  
6000	  
5000	  
Baseline	  
4000	  
3000	  
ConservaFon	  
2000	  
1000	  
0	  
2010	   2020	   2030	   2040	   2050	  
Year	  
 
Figure 5.19 Amount of mature forest cover for the baseline and conservation scenario 
Removing free roaming livestock not only affects the terrestrial environment but also the marine 
environment. An increase in more mature forest cover causes a decrease in sediment runoff. This 
means that the overall stress experienced by the corals decrease. This is visible in Figure 5.20. 
Coral diversity still decreases, yet at a slower rate compared to the baseline scenario.  
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 
	  %	  Cover	  
Amount	  of	  Forest	  (hectare)	  

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 45 
   
 
    
40	  
35	  
30	  
25	  
20	  
Baseline	  
15	  
ConservaFon	  
10	  
5	  
0	  
2010	   2020	   2030	   2040	   2050	  
Years	  
 
Figure 5.22 Comparison of the recreational value for the baseline and conservation scenario 
The value of fisheries depends on the amount of fish caught for commercial and recreational 
fisheries. Since fish populations have grown in numbers, the catch per unit effort increases. This 
is reflected in the fact that the fisheries value increases substantially. After a period of 30 years, 
the value of fisheries levels out at $1.8 million.  
Since the coral cover is increasing and the amount of mature forest is expanding the chances of 
encountering medicinal plants or extracting substances that can be of medicinal use, the 
biodiversity value increases. The model simulates that after 30 years the value in the conservation 
scenario will be $2.47 million.  
Another value that differs substantially from the baseline scenario is the non-use value. The WTP 
of Dutch and Bonairean depends on the qualitative state of the environment. In the baseline 
scenario the Non-use value drops by more than $30 million. In the conservation scenario, 
however, the value stabilises at $44 million (see Figure 5.23). 
70	  
60	  
50	  
40	   Baseline	  
30	  
ConservaFon	  
20	  
10	  
0	  
2010	   2020	   2030	   2040	   2050	  
Years	  
 
Figure 5.23 Comparison of the Non-Use value for the baseline and conservation scenario 
The interventions in the conservation scenario have a substantial positive influence on the 
different ecosystem services. As a result the TEV increases compared to the baseline scenario: 
the TEV decreases just as in the baseline scenario, however in the conservation scenario the trend 
diverges. After 30 years the value reaches $70 million, compared to a TEV of $38 million after 
30 years in the baseline scenario (Figure 5.15). As a result higher NPV is also emerging (Figure 
5.24). The difference between the scenarios decreases as the discount rate increase, but there 
remains to be a pronounced difference.  
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 
USD	  (in	  millions)	  
USD	  (in	  millions)	  

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 47 
   
 
    
100%	  
90%	  
80%	  
70%	  
60%	  
Sand	  and	  Dead	  Coral	  (%)	  
50%	  
40%	  
Algae	  Cover	  (%)	  
30%	  
Coral	  Cover	  (%)	  
20%	  
10%	  
0%	  
0	   5	   10	   15	   20	   25	   30	  
Year	  
 
Figure 5.25 Variation in the benthic cover for the sewage treatment scenario 
The other ecological parameters indicate little to no improvement in the model. Fish diversity and 
abundance follows the same trend as in the baseline scenario. The terrestrial parameters are also 
not affected. No negative effects by nutrient loading on the terrestrial ecosystem are assumed.  
Despite the fact that the implementation of a sewage treatment plant only seems to affect coral 
and algae cover, the marine indicator reaches its highest level of 0.59 (left side of Figure 5.26). 
The main reason is that the coral cover is one of the parameters that has the heaviest weight in 
determining the marine indicator.  
The terrestrial indicator actually reaches a lower level than in the baseline scenario (right side of 
Figure 5.26). The reason for this is twofold. First, there is nothing done to improve the qualitative 
state of the reef, and second the amount of pressure exerted by tourists increases as the tourists 
increase (see next section). 
0,80	  
0,30	  
0,70	  
0,25	  
0,60	  
0,20	  
0,50	  
0,40	  
0,15	  
0,30	  
0,10	  
0,20	  
0,05	  
0,10	  
0,00	  
0,00	  
2010	   2020	   2030	   2040	   2050	  
2010	   2020	   2030	   2040	   2050	  
Year	  
 Year	  
 
 
Figure 5.26 Comparison of the Marine Indicator (left) and the Terrestrial Indicator (right) for 
the baseline and sewage scenario 
5.4.2 Economic model 
Because the quality of the reef is increasing and most tourists that visit the island come for the 
aesthetic value of the coral reefs, there is an expansion in tourists visiting annually. Once again, it 
is the cruise tourists that increase substantially, from 230,000 to 550,000 in the 30 year period 
(see Figure 5.27). Such an increase in the cruise tourists has a negative influence on the visitation 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 
State	  of	  the	  Reef	  Indicator	  
	  %	  Cover	  
State	  of	  the	  Forest	  Indicator	  

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 49 
   
 
    
70	  
60	  
50	  
40	  
Baseline	  
30	  
Sewage	  
20	  
10	  
0	  
2010	   2015	   2020	   2025	   2030	   2035	   2040	   2045	  
Years	  
 
Figure 5.29 Comparison of the non-use value between the baseline and sewage scenario 
Other values that contribute also increase are the amenity and the biodiversity value. All caused 
by an increase in coral cover. The biodiversity value of the corals increases with 7 million USD. 
After 30 years, the amenity value has increased by $70,000 when compared to the baseline 
scenario.  
The creation of the sewage treatment plant is the most expensive intervention proposed within 
this report. However, it has also proven to be the scenario with the highest TEV. After the 30 
year simulation period the TEV reaches a value of $71 million (Figure 5.30). The sewage 
treatment plant resulted in a TEV that is two million higher than the conservation scenario and 
over $33 million more than the baseline scenario.  
 
120	  
100	  
80	  
60	   Baseline	  
Sewage	  
40	  
20	  
0	  
2010	   2020	   2030	   2040	   2050	  
Years	  
 
Figure 5.30 Comparison of the TEV between the baseline and sewage scenario 
The allocation of the different benefits is similar to the ones in the other scenarios: the non-use 
and the tourism and recreational value contribute the most to the TEV. The net present value is 
the highest at each discount rate compared to all other scenarios. At the lowest discount rate the 
NPV is $2,450 million and at the highest discount rate the NPV is $680 million (Figure 5.31). 
Despite having the highest TEV, the cost benefit ratio is not as good as in the conservation 
scenario. With a discount rate of 0% the highest ratio value is 7.45 and at a discount rate as high 
as 15% the benefit cost ratio still exceeds 1 (sees Figure 5.32). This proves that the investment in 
the sewage treatment plant pays off, even at high discount rates.   
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 
USD	  (in	  millions)	  
USD	  (in	  millions)	  

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 51 
   
 
    
6 Conclusions & Recommendations  
The analysis of the wide range of ecosystem services provided by the natural environment of 
Bonaire generates many opportunities for decision makers to improve economic and 
environmental policies on the island. To deliver information to decision makers the first step is to 
calculate the Total Economic Value (TEV) and to grasp the role of nature in the Bonairean 
economy. Next, an extended cost-benefit analysis of alternative future scenarios provides an 
objective means of deciding which interventions in the economy and environment generate the 
highest yield. Such an integral approach is intended to ensure the betterment of Bonaire’s 
environment while at the same time warranting sustainable economic development.  
6.1 Validity of the model and lessons to be learned 
The mutual relationship between ecological and economic processes of coral reef ecosystems is 
strong. Therefore, a multidisciplinary approach is essential in tackling the multiple threats that 
currently face the fragile ecosystems of Bonaire. The ecological economic simulation model is 
nothing but a first attempt to provide a platform for ecologists and economists to exchange 
knowledge on the degradation and management of the nature of Bonaire. Some will consider the 
simplifications that have been made in building the model and in conducting the management 
scenarios unacceptable. Indeed, we acknowledge that this is the weaker aspect of the approach 
followed. Yet, although the model simulations are far from accurate and sometimes lack the 
desired level of comprehension, they do provide a representation of the current state of the 
scientific knowledge available in the literature. Moreover, unlike most mono-disciplinary studies, 
the simulation model contains the main elements required to oversee the full picture of nature 
reef management on Bonaire and thereby enables scientist and managers to evaluate ecological 
and economic impacts effectively. Finally, the model does provide insights into the economic 
importance of nature for Bonaire and also sheds light on the effectiveness of various potential 
management interventions, although these lessons are surrounded by great uncertainty. Some of 
the main lessons of the study are summarised below. 
6.2 Total Economic Value versus Total Financial Value  
By summing up the worth of the range of valued ecosystem services, the TEV of the natural 
environment of Bonaire is estimated to be more than $105 million annually. To get an idea of the 
importance of nature for Bonaire, it is useful to compare the TEV of nature to the Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP). The GDP of the Bonaire economy was around $224 million in 2008, 
which means that welfare derived either directly or indirectly from ecosystems is almost half of 
Bonaire’s economy. Compared to other island-based studies, this shows that the economy of 
Bonaire has an extremely high dependence on their natural environment. Although the TEV of 
nature on Bonaire is very large, this aggregated value is composed of numerous latent welfare-
related values that are not necessarily translated into actual monetary flows. For example, the 
value by Dutch mainland citizens is a genuine economic value, yet, at the same time, this 
ecosystem service is predominantly a non-financial value (i.e. its value is not [fully] transferred 
in money terms to the financial economy of Bonaire). Of the TEV of $105 million, only one-third 
of this amount (i.e. $37 million) is truly traceable in the financial accounts of the economy of 
Bonaire. The majority of this financial value is captured by the tourism sector. 
6.3 Costs and benefits of environmental measures  
Through the use of simulation models, scenario development, and cost-benefit analysis the 
efficiency of various interventions is determined. Out of the extensive analysis of the ecosystem 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 53 
   
 
    
References 
Van Zanten, B., Van Beukering, P. and Wolfs E. (2012) on the coastal protection value of coral 
reefs of Bonaire. Report number R12-XX, Institute for Environmental Studies VU 
University Amsterdam, the Netherlands, December 2012 
Schep S, Brander L, Van Beukering P, Wolfs E (2012a). The touristic value of nature on Bonaire. 
A multiple valuation techniques approach. Report number R12-XX, Institute for 
Environmental Studies VU University Amsterdam, the Netherlands, December 2012 
Schep S, Johnson AE, Van Beukering P, Wolfs E. (2012b). The fishery value of coral reefs in 
Bonaire. Applying various valuation techniques. Report number R12-XX, Institute for 
Environmental Studies VU University Amsterdam, the Netherlands, December 2012 
Lacle F, Wolfs E, Van Beukering P, Brander L. (2012). Recreational and cultural value of 
Bonaire s nature to its inhabitants. Report number R12-XX, Institute for Environmental 
Studies VU University Amsterdam, the Netherlands, December 2012 
Van Beukering P, Botzen W, Wolfs E. (2012). The non-use value of nature ion the Netherlands 
and the Caribbean Netherlands. Applying and comparing contingent valuation and choice 
modelling approaches. Report number R12-XX, Institute for Environmental Studies VU 
University Amsterdam, the Netherlands, December 2012 
Van Beukering P. and Wolfs E. (2012). Essays on economic values of nature of Bonaire. A desk 
study. Report number R12-XX, Institute for Environmental Studies VU University 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands, December 2012 
Albins, M. A. (2011). Effects of the Invasive Pacific Red Lionfish Pterois volitans on Native 
Atlantic Coral-reef Fish Communities. PhD Thesis, Oregon State University, Department of 
Zoology, 224 pp. 
Albins, M. A. & Hixon, M. A. (2011). Worst case scenario: potential long-term effects of 
invasive predatory lionfish (Pterois volitans) on Atlantic and Caribbean coral-reef 
communities. Environmental Biology of Fishes. doi:10.1007/s10641-011-9795-1 
Alevizon, W. (2009). Caribbean Coral Reefs: Types, Characteristics, Marine Life. Retrieved from 
http://www.coral-reef-info.com/caribbean-coral-reefs.html. Accessed. June 13, 2012 
Annual Statistics Report. (2009). Bonaire Tourism. Bonaire Report 2008. Tourism Corporation 
Bonaire, Dutch Caribbean, 35 pp.  
Arias-González, J. E., Nuñez-Lara, E., González-Salas, C., & Galzin, R. (2004). Trophic models 
for investigation of fishing effect on coral reef ecosystems. Ecological Modelling, 172(2-4), 
197-212. doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2003.09.007 
st
Art, H. W. (1993). Eutrophication - A dictionary of ecology and environmental science (1 
edition). New York. Henry Holt and Company, 196 pp. 
Bak, M., Nieuwland, G., & Meesters, E. H. (2009). Coral Growth Rates Revisited After 31 
Years: What is Causing Lower Extension Rates in Acropora Palmata?. Buletin of Marine 
Science, 84(3), 287-294. 
Bak, R. P. M., Nieuwland, G., & Meesters, E. H. (2005). Coral reef crisis in deep and shallow 
reefs: 30 years of constancy and change in reefs of Curacao and Bonaire. Coral Reefs, 24(3), 
475-479. doi:10.1007/s00338-005-0009-1 
Baker, A. C., Glynn, P. W., & Riegl, B. (2008). Climate change and coral reef bleaching: An 
ecological assessment of long-term impacts, recovery trends and future outlook. Estuarine, 
Coastal and Shelf Science, 80(4), 435-471. Elsevier Ltd. doi:10.1016/j.ecss.2008.09.003 
Barott, K. L., Rodriguez-Mueller, B., Youle, M., Marhaver, K. L., Vermeij, M. J. a, Smith, J. E., 
& Rohwer, F. L. (2012). Microbial to reef scale interactions between the reef-building coral 
Montastraea annularis and benthic algae. Proceedings. Biological sciences / The Royal 
Society, 279(1733), 1655-1664. doi:10.1098/rspb.2011.2155 
Blackwood, J. C., Hastings, A., & Mumby, P. J. (2011). A model-based approach to determine 
the long-term effects of multiple interacting stressors on coral reefs. Ecological 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 55 
   
 
    
De Meyer K. (1998). Bonaire, Netherlands Antilles. Coastal region and small island. Papers 3. 
Debrot, A. O., & Bugter, R. (2010). Climate change effects on the biodiversity of the BES 
islands.Altera Report 2081, Wageningen. 40 pp. 
Dew, I. M. (2001). Theoretical model of a new fishery under a simple quota management system. 
Ecological Modelling, 143(1-2), 59-70. doi:10.1016/S0304-3800(01)00356-8 
Edwards, H. J., Elliott, I. A., Eakin, C. M., Irikawa, A., Madin, J. S., Mcfield, M., Morgan, J. A., 
van Woesik R., & Mumby P.J. (2011). How much time can herbivore protection buy for 
coral reefs under realistic regimes of hurricanes and coral bleaching? Global Change 
Biology, 17(6), 2033-2048. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2010.02366.x 
Evans, G.R. (1997). Economic Models - Chapter 1. Retrieved July 17, 2012 from 
http://www2.hmc.edu/~evans/chap1.pdf 
Gardner, T. A, Côté, I. M., Gill, J. A, Grant, A., & Watkinson, A. R. (2003). Long-term region-
wide declines in Caribbean corals. Science (New York, N.Y.), 301(5635), 958-60. 
doi:10.1126/science.1086050 
Groenenboom, W. and K. R. (2009). Document Bonaire (p. 23). Leveroij BV. Retrieved June 13, 
2012 from http://books.google.nl/books?id=abvJGRo_EuoC&hl=nl&source=gbs_navlinks_s 
Hal, C.A.S. & Day, J.W.(1990). Ecosytem Modeling in Theory and Practice: An Introduction 
with Case Histories. University Press of Colorado. pp. 7–8. ISBN 0-87081-216-5. 
Harty, M. (2011). Christmas tree worms (Spirobranchus giganteus) as a potential bioindicator 
species of sedimentation stress in coral reef environments of Bonaire, Dutch Caribbean. 
PhysisJournal of marine science. vol.IX, 31 pp. 
Hoegh-Guldberg, O. (1999). Climate change, coral bleaching and the future of the world’s coral 
reefs. Marine and Freshwater Research, 50, 839-66. 
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Mumby, P. J., Hooten, a J., Steneck, R. S., Greenfield, P., Gomez, E., 
Harvell, C. D., et al. (2007). Coral reefs under rapid climate change and ocean acidification. 
Science (New York, N.Y.), 318(5857), 1737-42. doi:10.1126/science.1152509 
Holmes, G., & Johnstone, R. W. (2010). Modelling coral reef ecosystems with limited 
observational data. Ecological Modelling, 221(8), 1173-1183. Elsevier B.V. 
doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2010.01.010 
ICRI (International Coral Reef Initiative). (n.d.). Status of and threat to coral reefs. Retrieved 
June 16, 2012 from http://www.icriforum.org/about-coral-reefs/status-and-threat-coral-reefs 
InfoBonaire. (2012). Activities on Bonaire. Retrieved June 17, 2012 from 
http://www.infobonaire.com/activities.html 
IUCN. (2011). Coral Reef Resilience Assessment of the Bonaire National Marine Park , 
Netherlands Antilles. Gland, Switzerland. 51 pp. 
Lacle, F. A. (2012). Recreational and cultural value of Bonaire’ s nature to its inhabitants. 
Research project Msc. Faculty of Earth and Life Sciences, Vrije University Amsterdam. 86 
pp.  
McClary, M. & (2010). The Encyclopedia of Earth - Threats to coral reefs. Retrieved June 10, 
2012 from http://www.eoearth.org/article/Threats_to_coral_reefs?topic=49513#gen9 
McClanahan, T. R. (1995). A coral reef ecosystem-fisheries model: impacts of fishing intensity 
and catch selection on reef structure and processes. Ecological Modelling, 80(1), 1-19. 
doi:10.1016/0304-3800(94)00042-G 
Meindertsma, J. D. (n.a.). Cost Benefit Analysis III: Environmental Perspective - Key Concept. 
Learning resource for ICRA. Retrieved July 10, 2012,from http://www.icra-
edu.org/objects/anglolearn/Cost_Benefit_Analysis_3-Key_Concepts(new).pdf 
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. (2005). Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Synthesis. 
Island Press, Washington, DC. 
Millspaugh, J. J., & Thompson F. R. (2009). General Principles for Developing Landscape 
Models for Wildlife Conservation. Models for planning wildlife conservation in large 
landscapes. Academic Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-12-373631-4. 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 57 
   
 
    
System, I. (2012). Stella - Systems Thinking for Education and Research. Retrieved April 15, 
2012 from http://www.iseesystems.com/softwares/Education/StellaSoftware.aspx 
Systems Management College. (2001). Systems Engineering Fundamentals. Supplementary Text 
Prepared By The Defense Acquisition University Press Fort Belvoir, Virginia 22060-5565. 
170 pp 
Tanner, J. E. (1995). Competition between scleractinian corals and macroalgae: An experimental 
investigation of coral growth, survival and reproduction. Journal of Experimental Marine 
Biology and Ecology, 190(2), 151-168. doi:10.1016/0022-0981(95)00027-O 
The Nature Conservancy. (2012). Bonaire. Coral reefs-A reef resilience toolkit module. 
Retrieved July 17, 2012 from http://www.reefresilience.org/Toolkit_Coral/C8_Bonaire.html 
Thur, S. M. (2010). User fees as sustainable financing mechanisms for marine protected areas: 
An application to the Bonaire National Marine Park. Marine Policy, 34(1), 63-69. Elsevier. 
doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2009.04.008 
van Beukering, P., Haider, W., Longland, M., Cesar, H., Sablan, J., Shjegstad, S., Beardmore, B., 
et al. (2007a). The economic value of Guam’s coral reefs. Technical Report nb.116. 
University of Guam Maryne Laboratory. 130 pp 
Van Beukering, P., Brander, L., Tompkins, E. and McKenzie, E., (2007b), Valuing the 
Environment in Small Islands - An Environmental Economics Toolkit, ISBN 978 1 86107 
5949 
van Beukering, P., Brander, L., van Zanten, B., Verbrugge, E., & Lems, K. (2011). The 
Economic Value of the Coral Reef Ecosystems of the United States Virgin Islands.IVM 
Report, R-11/06, VU University Amsterdam. 160 pp. 
van Kekem, A. J., Roest, C. W. J., & and van der Salm, C. (2006). Critical review of the 
proposed irrigation and effluent standards for Bonaire. Alterra Report nb.1289. 
Wageningen. 129 pp. 
Vermeij, M. J. a, van Moorselaar, I., Engelhard, S., Hörnlein, C., Vonk, S. M., & Visser, P. M. 
(2010). The effects of nutrient enrichment and herbivore abundance on the ability of turf 
algae to overgrow coral in the Caribbean. PloS one, 5(12), e14312. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0014312 
Vermeij, M. J. A. (2012). The current state of Curacao’s coral reefs.Report for Carmabi 
Foundation/University of Amsterdam. 34 pp. 
Watzold, F., Drechsler, M., Armstrong,C. W., Artner, S.F., Grimm,V., Huth,A., Perrings, C., 
Possingham,H.G., Shogren,J. F.,  Skonhoft,A., Verboom-Vasiljev ,J. & Wissel, C.(2006). 
Ecological-Economic Modeling for Biodiversity. Conservation Biology Volume 20, No. 4, 
1034–1041 
Management: Potential, Pitfalls, and Prospects 
West Bay Website. (2012). West Bay Harbour. Retrieved July 17, 2012, from 
http://www.westbay.co.uk/harbour/ 
Wieggers, M. W. (2007). Impact of Increased Nutrient Input on Coral Reefs on Bonaire and 
Curacao. Utrecht University. Report University Utrecht. 66 pp. 
Wolfs, E. (2010). What ’ s Bonaire Nature worth?.Project proposal. 48 pp. 
World Bank. (2012). GDP growth (annual %). Retrieved June 18, 2012, from 
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG/countries?display=graph 
WRI (World Resources Institute). (n.d.). Reefs at Risk in the Caribbean.Retrieved May 25, 2012 
from http://www.wri.org/publication/content/7918 
 
 
 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 59 
   
 
    
discharge of secondary treated sewage from the resort on Hayman Island. On Green Island 
sewage from septic systems is subject to primary treatment before discharge. They attribute the 
increase in seagrass beds to nutrient enrichment from sewage discharge. At John Brewer Reef 
Floating Hotel (removed in 1989) treated sewage was transported and discharged 5 km off the 
reef and the only effluent discharged was brine from the desalination plant. Overall, coral cover 
increased in the vicinity of the hotel and the authors conclude that there was no detrimental 
impact of its placement or operations. They suggest that the impact of sewage discharges on coral 
communities is mostly dependent on the level and quality of treatment.  
There are some field studies in which nutrients were experimentally enhanced. In 72 ammonium 
and phosphate were added to a patch reef at One Tree Island (GBR). Nutrient addition increased 
primary production (photosynthesis) (Kinsey and Domm 1974) and reduction of calcification . 
The experiments were repeated in a broad scale set up with multiple patches with different 
nutrient additions and measurements of a wide range of variable in 1993-1996 in the ENCORE 
project. Hoegh-Guldberg et al. (1997) studied the impact of nutrient enrichment in the Great 
Barrier Reef as part of the ENCORE project (Enrichment of Nutrients on Coral Reefs 
Experiment). Nitrogen and phosphorus (10 mM NH4 and 2 mM PO4 were added to experimental 
corals on micro-atolls. Although the results of the experiment were not conclusive, it is suggested 
that increased levels of phosphorus have a negative effect on coral growth. Strong seasonal 
variation in calcification rates appears to have masked the impact in the experiment. The final 
conclusions of ENCORE sum up to: increased coral mortality, decreased coral growth, increased 
calcification but lower skeletal density (weak structure) and reduced settlement of larvae (Koop, 
et al. 2001).  
Simmons and Associates (1994), in their study of the impact of tourism on the marine 
environment of the Caribbean, note that “….the impact of liquid waste from yachts has been 
poorly studied in the Caribbean region. While it is very likely to have an effect on water quality 
in lagoons and semi-enclosed bays, its impact is probably small or negligible in open bays with 
adequate flushing.” Talge (1992) also touches on the issue of nutrient enrichment by diver 
activities and boat effluents. She raises the question: “…. But are the amounts significant and do 
they remain over and around the reef long enough to fertilize reef communities?” These 
questions have remained unanswered to date.  
An interesting quote from the abstracts of the 10th International Coral Reef Symposium in Bali 
of which the proceedings will hopefully come out shortly: Bucher, D.J. “Ammonium reduced the 
ability of corals to repair lesions, a result which has implications for the recovery of polluted 
reefs following physical damage.” 
The hampering of natural restoration through reproduction is of utmost importance: “The point 
is, while levels of stress may be sub-lethal to adult coral colonies, they may be sufficient to cause 
reproductive and recruitment failure on nearby and distant reefs (Richmond 1993). Reefs may 
still hang in there, but where is a future without new generations? 
Nutrients can either lead to reduced coral cover by direct harmful effects or by stimulating algae 
which then outgrow and out-compete corals. Well known cases of coral-algal phase shifts are 
Kaneohe Bay in Hawaii (Smith, et al. 1981) and Jamaica (Hughes 1994). For simplicities sake 
the mechanism of influence is by-passed and a direct relation between nutrients and coral cover is 
sought, because the problem with algal overgrowth is hugely complex, uncertain (“Competitive 
outcomes did not support the argument that algae are more successful competitors in more 
eutrophic conditions” (McCook 2001)) and difficult to quantify (McCook 1999, McCook 2001, 
McCook, et al. 2001). Field data have been chosen from Barbados (Tomascik and Sander 1985, 
Tomascik and Sander 1987, Wittenberg and Hunte 1992), Brazil (Costa, et al. 2000), Curaçao 
(Gast 1992, Gast 1998, Gast, et al. 1998, Gast, et al. 1999), Kaneohe Bay (Smith, et al. 1981, 
Hunter and Evans 1995) and Reunion (Naim 1993), which are used to distil relationships 
between nutrients and coral cover and the number of coral species. Figure A.1 includes the data 
of all these studies and shows that there is a general trend of higher concentrations causing lower 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 61 
   
 
    
Equations:  
• % coral cover = 32 – 15*DIN (mM) 
• % coral cover = 31 – 30*NH4 (mM) 
• % coral cover = 19 – 13*NO3 (mM) 
• # coral species = 33 – 11*DIN (mM) 
• # coral species = 31 – 22*NH4 (mM) 
• # coral species = 33 – 22*NO3 (mM) 
Remarks:  
• Regressions of # coral species Barbados and Curaçao data 
• For coral cover the data from Curaçao have been separated from the rest of the data set, 
because the show a far higher coral cover with comparable nutrient concentrations (the cause 
could be different local circumstances or a difference in methods with which the data were 
obtained).  
• Although it is ridiculous to draw a line through two points, this has only been done to show 
that the slopes of the lines are comparable and that the patterns at Curaçao are comparable to 
those of all other sites combined regardless of the higher cover.  
• Correlation coefficients are included in the excel sheet. However, as the measuring error of 
nutrients is negligible compared to the uncertainties in establishing coral cover and because 
there is an a priory accepted effect of the X variable on the Y variable, regression is assumed 
to be justified. 
The final choice in for modelling nutrient pollution is to concentrate on DIN rather than either 
nitrate or ammonium, because: (1) Ammonium is rapidly converted via nitrite to nitrate by 
nitrifying bacteria in the reef water column and sediments; (2) The conversion of urea to 
ammonium to nitrite to nitrate also takes place in the sewage system. As these processes are 
oxygen dependent, mainly ammonium enhanced with direct discharge of untreated sewage, but 
an unknown mixture of ammonium and nitrate is brought into the water column with the outflow 
of a sewage treatment plant; and (3) Groundwater seepage always and mainly leads to enhanced 
nitrate concentrations, because the long residence times give ample opportunity for the 
conversion. 
Hence the use of DIN includes bacterial conversion effects and covers both sewage discharge and 
groundwater seepage. As the slopes differ with a stronger effect of ammonium, one of the other 
figures could be applied accordingly in areas where the main eutrophication cause is known.  
The number of scleractinian corals also decreases with eutrophication. DIN is chosen again, 
because it shows the strongest relation (Figure A.3) and to be consistent with the coral cover 
equation. 
30
25
20
15
y = -10.779x + 32.897
10
2
R = 0.634
5
0
0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00
DIN (microM)
 
Figure A.3 Decreasing number of stony coral species with increasing DIN concentration. Data 
from Curaçao and Barbados (see earlier references). 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 
number of coral species

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 63 
   
 
    
• Decreased calcification. 
• Decreased net productivity of corals. 
• Slower rates of reef accretion. 
Marszalek (1981) monitored the impact of a large-scale dredging operation for beach 
replenishment in Miami, Florida. He distinguished three types of impact: mechanical damage, 
sediment loading and increased turbidity. A substantial percentage of coral colonies showed signs 
of stress such as partial bleaching, polyp swelling and excessive mucus secretion. He suggests 
that sustained increased turbidity was more detrimental than short-term sediment loading.  
During a 9 months dredging operation in 1987 in Thailand reefs subject to the resulting 
sedimentation showed significant decreases of coral cover and coral diversity (Brown 1990). 
However, these reefs were recovered in 1988 to pre-dredging levels.  
Work by Hubbard et al. (1987) in St. John, US Virgin Islands, demonstrates a gradual decrease in 
growth by 10-20% over the past 100 to 200 years. Their data suggest that this decline may be due 
to increased sedimentation following the cultivation period of the island. 
Van’t Hof (1983) describes the effects of dredging and excavation (to construct a canal system 
and waterfront home sites in a limestone cliff) on the fringing reef in Bonaire. Dredging resulted 
in sediment loading of almost 100 times the background level and a decrease in percent live coral 
cover adjacent to the dredge site. The largest change in percent live coral cover was observed on 
the lower reef slope (35m depth, dominated by Agaricia lamarcki) from 73% cover pre-dredging 
to 32% post-dredging. 
Hodgson (1990) determined that sedimentation inhibited settlement of coral larvae on artificial 
substrate in a common Indo-Pacific coral species, thus potentially affecting coral recruitment 
under natural circumstances.  
Extensive studies on effects of sedimentation in combination with eutrophication are those done 
at Barbados by Tomascik & Sander. They measured both suspended particulate matter (SPM), 
which is an indication of particles in the water column, and total downward flux of SPM (DF-
SPM), which shows how many of those particles sink down on corals on the bottom. 
Comparisons of the sampling stations show that these two variables do not always follow the 
same trend: a large amount of particles in the water column does not necessarily lead to high 
downward sedimentation. The significance of difference between the 2 variables lies in the 
mechanism of damage: the former reduces light available to corals and thus photosynthesis, 
while the latter leads to smothering, which corals have to remove. The end result is in so far the 
same that the coral has less energy available and is weakened. Rather surprisingly, there was a 
significant negative relation between SPM and coral cover, but not between DF-SPM and coral 
cover. However, this last correlation did become significant when only the summer data were 
used. Apparently, the physical circumstances (current, waves) determine whether sediment rains 
down or stays suspended in the water column. The studies mentioned above show reductions of 
coral growth rates, cover, coral species, diversity, numbers of larvae, settlement, and changes in 
coral community composition.  
Another Caribbean island where extensive studies have been done on anthropogenic effects is 
Curaçao. Aspects of corals and coral reef ecology have been compared between influenced sites 
directly in front of Willemstad and non-affected sites upcurrent. Increased sedimentation has 
been measured by Meesters (Meesters, et al. 1992). This sedimentation caused a reduced capacity 
to heal artificial lesions (Gast 1992, Meesters, et al. 1992). Comparison of the coral reef 
community (chain line transect method, the coral species or substrate type under each chain was 
scored) at the impacted and control sites showed a reduction of coral cover from circa 60% to 
35%, a reduction of the number of coral species from 20 to 13 (9 m depth) and reduction of the 
coral diversity index (Shannon-Weaver) from 2.33 to 1.65 (Gast 1992). The whole coral 
community had been changed quite drastically. The control reefs showed a high variety in 
species and growth forms of virtually only stony corals. But reefs in front of Willemstad are 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 65 
   
 
    
Annex C Physical anthropogenic damage 
Several authors have researched and documented snorkeler and diver damage. It is often difficult 
to distinguish such damage from natural damage or other forms of human-induced damage (for 
example, see Rogers et al., 1988). This points to the need to design research methods that will 
target a specific issue and eliminate compounding factors. Hawkins and Roberts (1993b) and 
Scura and Van’t Hof (1993) have applied such methods by comparing heavily dived and little 
dived areas and by looking at gradients of impact along a line of decreasing recreational activity. 
Rogers et al. (1988a, 1988b) monitored coral breakage at two reefs in the Virgin Islands National 
Park and Biosphere Reserve (VINP), as well as individual Elkhorn coral colonies (Acropora 
palmata). They attributed broken coral branches to careless snorkelers, boat strikes and swells. 
They noticed divers and snorkelers bumping into corals or standing on them, and overturning 
corals to reach lobster. Even in the absence of major storms or other stresses, only 10 of 50 
tagged Elkhorn coral colonies remained undisturbed over a 7-month period of observation. 
Rogers et al. (1988a) report that at Trunk Bay in VINP, where a snorkeling trail was established 
in the early sixties –receiving 170,000 visitors annually by 1986- “.... the trail has deteriorated 
substantially as a result of people standing on corals, breaking coral branches while snorkeling, 
and removing organisms as souvenirs.” 
Tilmant (1987) and Tilmant and Schmahl (1981) studied the impact of recreational activities on 
buoyed reefs in Biscayne National Park, Florida. Each buoyed reef received three or more times 
as much use as its control. The most frequent recreational activities were snorkeling and spear 
fishing. The mean frequency of damaged coral encounters ranged from 35 to 140 per 30-minute 
count. Although significant differences in damage between buoyed reefs and controls did occur 
at some sample points, such differences did not follow a consistent pattern that could be readily 
attributed to human use. Incidence of damage to soft corals was much higher than that to hard 
corals. They recognized that, since the level of recreational use on the reefs studied was relatively 
low (no more than 1,500 people per reef per year), the impacts may be more severe at higher 
levels of use.  
Talge (1991) studied the behavior of snorkelers and SCUBA divers in the Looe Key National 
Marine Sanctuary, Florida, in terms of the number of interactions between divers and coral. The 
interactions she observed were: 
• Hand on the coral to steady or help gain control 
• Kicking or brushing with the fins 
• Standing on corals 
• Grabbing corals (especially soft corals) to pull themselves through the water 
• Rubbing against coral with any part of the body 
• Sitting coral with the SCUBA tank or other pieces of equipment 
• Creating sediment clouds 
The most frequent interactions were “finning” and “push-off”. The average number of 
interactions per diver is ten per dive. Snorkelers had significantly less interactions than SCUBA 
divers, divers without gloves had fewer interactions than divers with gloves, and females had 
fewer interactions than males. Over two-thirds of the interactions were with hard corals. This 
contrasts with the findings of Tilmant and Schmahl (1981) and may well be due to the selection 
of the study sites, one being comparatively richer in soft corals than the other. Coral breakage 
included only 0.6% of all incidents. This author also expressed concern with increase in nitrogen 
concentration of the water by divers urinating over the reef. This concern has not been 
substantiated by further research.  
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 67 
   
 
    
rock and rubble was significantly higher, while percentage of live coral cover and number of hard 
coral colonies were lower. Coral colonies were also smaller in trampled areas compared with 
control areas. In summary, heavy trampling by divers appears to alter the coral population 
structure of the reef flat. Although the Western Atlantic reefs do not have extensive reef flats as 
occur in Indo-Pacific reefs, some Caribbean islands have experienced or continue to experience 
the effect of divers and snorkelers treading on coral. Buccoo Reef in Tobago is probably the most 
infamous example of the destruction caused by reef walking (see Rogers et al., 1988b). Where 
shore diving is practiced, divers and snorkelers will also have some impact on shallow reef areas 
by trampling.  
Hawkins and Roberts (1992a, 1992b, 1993a, 1993b, 1994) compared heavily dived and un-dived 
areas in Egypt and found significant differences in levels of damage. Numbers of broken hard 
coral colonies, live loose coral fragments, reattached fragments, abraded colonies, and part-dead 
colonies were higher in dived areas. They concluded that divers cause significant damage to 
benthic communities on the fore-reef slope. Their findings suggest that damage accumulates 
rapidly when a new site is opened up for diving, with impact stabilizing after a certain level of 
use had been reached. The three study sites received between 5,000 and 13,000 dives per year. 
Hawkins and Roberts (1994) suggest that dive sites at Sharm-el-Sheik in Egypt can accommodate 
10,000 to 15,000 dives per year without serious degradation. 
Epstein et al. (1999) compared populations of the hard coral Stylophora pistillata at a site that had 
been closed to the public for six years with two nearby sites, open to the public, in Eilat, Northern 
Red Sea. The main results of the study indicate that: (1) live coral cover was three times lower at 
the open sites than at the closed site; (2) there were significantly more small colonies (recruits) at 
the open sites and significantly less large-size colonies; (3) the average number of broken 
colonies was three times higher at the open sites. They interpret the lower breakage level in the 
closed site as a sign of the effectiveness of the closure, but they also conclude that a no-use 
policy is not sufficient for protecting small reef areas.  
Jameson et al. (1999) developed a Coral Damage Index (CDI) to assess the extent and severity of 
physical damage to coral. Sites are characterized as “hot spots” if in any transect the percent of 
broken coral colonies is 4% or more, or if the percent cover by coral rubble is 3% or more. In a 
study of four diving sites off Hurghada and Safaga, Egypt, in the Red Sea, 40% of the transects 
surveyed qualified as “hot spots”. The relatively large number of hot spots in shallow water 
suggests that most of the damage was caused by anchors dragging across the reef. They conclude 
that the diving carrying capacity of the sites is being exceeded by large amounts.  
Muthiga and McClanahan (1997) compared the impact of visitor use (diving and snorkeling) in 
heavily used sites and less frequented sites. They found no significant differences in coral cover 
or bare rock and rubble between sites, nor differences in coral species composition and diversity. 
However, there was significantly more damage to coral in the high-use sites, as evidenced by the 
number of broken, abraded, and broken and reattached coral colonies. Greater damage as 
observed in shallow than deep areas, which may indicate that snorkelers have more impact than 
SCUBA divers. Differences between the results of this study and those in the Red Sea may be 
explained to a large extent by the much higher visitation levels in the Red Sea. 
Davis at al. (1995) observed diver interactions in the Julian Rocks Aquatic Reserve in Eastern 
Australia. Thirty divers were observed for about 30 minutes each. The number of diver contacts 
ranged from 2 to 121 (average 35 contacts per dive). More than 50% were contacts made with 
fins. Only 7.2% of contacts resulted in noticeable level of damage. The majority of damaging 
contacts were with hard corals, with lesser damage inflicted on sponges and turf algae. More 
experienced divers (those with more than 100 logged dives) made significantly less uncontrolled 
contacts than less experienced divers.  
Harriott et al. (1997) conducted a similar study of diver contacts at four other locations in Eastern 
Australia (Heron Island and Lady Elliott Island in the Southern Great Barrier Reef, and Gneering 
Shoals and Solitary Islands in sub-tropical Eastern Australia). There was a large range in the total 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 

The total economic value of nature on Bonaire 69 
   
 
    
Annex D Overfishing 
This Appendix describes the economic and ecological consequences of overfishing and looks 
briefly at marine reserves as a way of coping with fishing pressure. Overfishing is different from 
the other threats described here, in that it does not have the same type of direct destructive 
impacts. Modest forms of non-destructive overfishing will, in fact, have very little impact on 
corals. Extreme forms of non-destructive overfishing could, on the other hand, alter the 
ecosystem balance, ultimately leading to a reef dominance by sea urchins or macro-algae and 
resulting in a dramatic drop in fishery yields and reduced coral biomass and productivity 
(McClanahan, 1995). 
An interesting example of overfishing of invertebrates is given by a case of mother-of-pearls 
(Trochus spp.) in a village in Central Maluku (Indonesia) (Figure D.4). A traditional management 
scheme, referred to as sasi, was in place with three year harvesting cycles. At some stage, annual 
harvesting was allowed, leading to severe overfishing of the resource. In the time of the 3-year 
closed season, the average yield was around 3400 kg (over 1100 kg per year). In the time of 
annual collection since 1987, the average annual yield of just over 400 kg.  
 
4,500
4,000
Three	  Year	  Cycle
3,500
3,000
2,500
One	  Year	  C ycle
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92
 
Year
Figure D.4 Yield of Trochus Shells in Noloth (Central Maluku, Indonesia) in 1969-1992 
(source: data gathered from village head at Noloth, Maluku, as presented in Cesar et 
al. 1997). 
Costs and benefits of overfishing in Indonesia are presented in Cesar (1996). He compares 
fisheries benefits in case of open access (OA) versus maximum sustainable yield (MSY) levels. 
He used data from Southeast Asia and the Pacific partly based on Munro & Williams (1985) and 
Alcala & Ross (1990). The latter describes an interesting case where protective fishery 
management was discontinued and where fishery yields dropped very quickly after resource 
access was re-opened. This is the same experience as in Hawaii where fisheries were re-opened 
after World War II with trophy catches during the first year. A comparison of fish standing stock 
in the Main Hawaiian Islands (heavily fished) versus the Northwest Hawaiian Islands (no fishing) 
also shows a dramatic difference (Friedlander & DeMartini, 2002). Cesar (1996) comes with an 
estimate in terms of net present benefit (10% discount rate; 25 year time horizon) of US$ 109,900 
of the MSY and US$ 38.5 thousand in the case of OA for Indonesia. 
Marine reserves: There is a growing body of literature suggesting that the establishment of 
marine reserves can be a sound management option in the light of overfishing. See for instance, 
Alcala (1988), White (1989), Alcala & Russ (1990), Polunin & Roberts (1993), Roberts (1995), 
Russ (1989, 1994). For a recent overview, see Rodwell & Roberts (2000). For instance, Alcala 
(1988) presents estimates of the island of Sumilon, where fish yields of 14-24 mt/km2/year have 
been reported before the sanctuary and where these catches increased to 36 mt/km2/year when 
the marine reserve was in place. Fish yields fell back to about 20 mt/km2/year when island 
IVM Institute for Environmental Studies 
kg. of Trochus

