

TABLE OF CONTENTS  
I. INTRODUCTORY INFORMATION 2 
II. ABOUT THE NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 5 
III. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 13 
IV. COUNTRY PROFILE: FOUNDATIONS FOR THE NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM 19 
V. CORRUPTION PROFILE                                                                                                                       27 
VI. ANTI-CORRUPTION ACTIVITIES 31 
VII. NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM                                            
 
1. LEGISLATURE 35 
2. EXECUTIVE 54 
3. JUDICIARY 72 
4. PUBLIC SECTOR 84 
5. LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 103 
6. ELECTORAL MANAGEMENT BODY 118 
7. OMBUDSMAN 129 
8. SUPREME AUDIT AND SUPERVISORY INSTITUTIONS (PUBLIC SECTOR) 141 
9. ANTI-CORRUPTION AGENCIES 158 
10. POLITICAL PARTIES 160 
11. MEDIA 173 
12. CIVIL SOCIETY 185 
13. BUSINESS 195 
14. SUPERVISORY INSTITUTIONS (PRIVATE SECTOR) 208 
 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 230 
IX. ANNEX 242 
  

Transparency International project team 
Alejandro Salas, project supervision 
Dr. Finn Heinrich, quality assurance and project supervision 
Zoë Reiter, project management 
Susanne Kuehn, quality assurance 
Andrew McDevitt, quality assurance 
Alice McCool, project coordination 
Alison McMeekin, project coordination 
Natalie Baharav, press relations and publicity 
 
Lead researcher and author   
P.C.M. (Nelly) Schotborgh-van de Ven Msc CFE 
 
Co-researcher and author 
Dr. S. (Susan) van Velzen 
 
Research assistant 
E. (Estherina) Garcia 
 
Advisory group   
M.L. (Miguel) Alexander LLM 
R.A.B. (Richard) Begina Msc 
R. (Ronald) Gomes Casseres Msc 
F.M. (Franklin) Hanze LLM 
S.M.C. (Stella) Herrera Mscf 
R.H. (Roland) Ignacio 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
3 
CURAÇAO 
 

II. ABOUT THE NATIONAL 
INTEGRITY SYSTEM 
ASSESSMENT 
The National Integrity System assessment approach used in this report provides a framework to 
analyse both the vulnerabilities of a given country to corruption as well as the effectiveness of 
national anti-corruption efforts. The framework includes all principal institutions and actors that form 
a state. These include all branches of government, the public and private sector, the media, and civil 
society (the ‘pillars’ as represented in the diagram below). The concept of the National Integrity 
System has been developed and promoted by Transparency International as part of its holistic 
approach to fighting corruption. While there is no blueprint for an effective system to prevent 
corruption, there is a growing international consensus as to the salient institutional features that 
work best to prevent corruption and promote integrity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A National Integrity System assessment is a powerful advocacy tool that delivers a holistic picture of 
a country’s institutional landscape with regard to integrity, accountability and transparency. A strong 
and functioning National Integrity System serves as a bulwark against corruption and guarantor of 
accountability, while a weak system typically harbours systemic corruption and produces a myriad of 
governance failures. The resulting assessment yields not only a comprehensive outline of reform 
needs but also a profound understanding of their political feasibility. Strengthening the National 
Integrity System promotes better governance across all aspects of society and, ultimately, 
contributes to a more just society. 
 
 
 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
5 
CURAÇAO 
 

The Curaçao assessment addresses 14 pillars: 
   
CORE GOVERNANCE  PUBLIC SECTOR AGENCIES NON-GOVERNMENTAL 
INSTITUTIONS ACTORS 
   
Legislature Public sector 
Anti-corruption agency  
 
   
Executive Law enforcement agencies Media 
 
   
Judiciary Electoral management Civil society 
body 
 
   
Ombudsman Political parties 
 
   
Supreme audit and Business 
supervisory institutions 
(public sector) 
 
   
Supervisory institutions 
private sector 
 
 
 
Each of the 14 pillars is assessed along three dimensions that are essential to its ability to prevent 
corruption:  
 its overall capacity, in terms of resources and independence 
 its internal governance regulations and practices, focusing on whether the institutions in 
the pillar are transparent, accountable and act with integrity 
 its role in the overall integrity system, focusing on the extent to which the institutions in 
the pillar fulfill their assigned role with regards to preventing and fighting corruption 
 
Each dimension is measured by a common set of indicators. The assessment examines for every 
dimension both the legal framework of each pillar as well as the actual institutional practice, thereby 
highlighting any discrepancies between the formal provisions and reality in practice. 
  
DIMENSION   INDICATORS (LAW AND PRACTICE) 
  
Capacity  Resources 
 Independence  
 
  
Governance  Transparency 
 Accountability 
Integrity  
 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
7 
CURAÇAO 
 

equipment for judges? Is there stability of human 
resources? Do staff members have training 
opportunities? Is there sufficient training to 
enhance a judge’s knowledge of the law, judicial 
skills including court and case management, 
judgment writing and conflicts of interest?  
  
The existing financial, human and infrastructural 
MINIMUM SCORE (0) 
resources of the judiciary are minimal and fully 
insufficient to effectively carry out its duties. 
  
The judiciary has some resources. However, 
MID-POINT SCORE (50) 
significant resource gaps lead to a certain degree 
of ineffectiveness in carrying out its duties. 
  
MAXIMUM SCORE (100) The judiciary has an adequate resource base to 
effectively carry out its duties. 
 
The guiding questions, used by Transparency International worldwide, for each indicator were 
developed by examining international best practices, as well as by using our own experience of 
existing assessment tools for each of the respective pillars, and by seeking input from (international) 
experts on the respective institutions. These indicator score sheets provide guidance for the 
Curaçao assessment, but when appropriate the lead researcher has added questions or left some 
questions unanswered, as not all aspects are relevant to the national context. The full toolkit with 
information on the methodology and score sheets are available on the Transparency International 
6
website.  
To answer the guiding questions, the research team relied on four main sources of information: 
national legislation, secondary reports and research, interviews with key experts, and written 
questionnaires. Secondary sources included reliable reporting by national civil society organisations, 
international organisations, governmental bodies, think tanks and academia.  
To gain an in-depth view of the current situation, a minimum of two key informants were interviewed 
for each pillar – at least one representing the pillar under assessment, and one expert on the subject 
matter but external to it. In addition, more key informants, that is people ‘in the field’, were 
interviewed. Professionals with expertise in more than one pillar were also interviewed in order to 
get a cross-pillar view. A full list of interviewees (with 38 people in total) is contained in Annex I. 
Exploratory talks were conducted with an additional ten people. To gain a broader view of the 
current situation in several pillars, 49 written questionnaires with the main questions from the 
indicator score sheet were sent to organisations in key positions within some pillars. Of the 49 
questionnaires, 23 were completed and returned. An overview can be found in Annex II.   
 
 
 
 
 
6
 www.transparency.org/policy_research/nis/methodology [accessed 21 December 2012]. 
 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
9 
CURAÇAO 
 

  
F.M. (Frank) Hanze LLM Former secretary general of Parliament of the 
 Netherlands Antilles 
  
S.M.C. (Stella) Herrera Msc Former diplomat, former central banker, 
international relations and anti money 
laundering expert 
  
R.H. (Roland) Ignacio 
Secretary general of Central Trade Unions in 
Curaçao and board member of the Pension 
Funds for Employees in Public Service 
 
The members of the advisory group met nine times (23 and 29 August 2012; 3 and 7 September,    
3 December 2012; 21 January, 2, 24 and 26 April 2013). At the meetings, extensive feedback was 
given by the advisors to the lead researcher on the methodology (for example identifying 
interviewees and workshop attendees) and findings. The draft report was critically reviewed and 
indicator scores were validated by the advisory group. As peer reviewer, Professor Jaime M. Saleh 
(former governor of the Netherlands Antilles and former president of the Court of Justice of Aruba, 
Curaçao, Sint Maarten and Bonaire) also provided comments on the draft report. 
At the beginning of September 2012 several information sessions with key stakeholders were 
organised under the supervision of Transparency International, Alejandro Salas (regional director, 
Americas Department) and Zoë Reiter (regional programme manager, Americas Department). The 
meetings resulted in a number of useful recommendations on how to conduct the assessment in 
Curaçao (see Annex III for an overview of the participants).   
In April 2013 the assessment process culminated in a consultative national integrity workshop 
where, under supervision of Transparency International’s Zoë Reiter, the preliminary findings of the 
evaluation were discussed among key stakeholders and recommendations for priority actions (or 
even the contours of a comprehensive national anti-corruption strategy) were identified.  
Each draft pillar went through a series of internal and external reviews. The Transparency 
International secretariat and the advisors reviewed the draft materials and agreed upon or adjusted 
the preliminary scores assigned by the lead researcher. Several draft chapters were reviewed by 
representatives of the insitutions under assessment to correct errors of fact. The draft report was 
updated with the outcomes of the national integrity workshop. The full report was reviewed by the 
Transparency International secretariat, the advisory group, and one external academic reviewer who 
provided an extensive set of comments and feedback. Finally the report was published and 
disseminated widely in Curaçao. 
 
Limitations 
Assessments are in general conducted by local in-country organisations, usually Transparency 
International national chapters. We have national chapters in more than 100 countries, including in 
7
several Caribbean countries. There is no Transparency International national chapter in Curaçao.  
While the methodology is developed to be robust and replicable, it does not claim to cover the full 
spectrum of issues on integrity and governance of Curaçao. Due to the prescribed approach of the 
assessment and time and budget limitations, choices had to be made on the selection of oral and 
written sources as well as on the selection of issues to be covered.  
 
7
 www.transparency.org/whoweare/organisation/our_chapters [accessed 21 December 2012]. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
11 
CURAÇAO 
 

III. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Corruption is rarely an isolated phenomenon found only within a specific institution, sector or group 
of actors. It is usually of a systemic nature and fighting it requires a holistic and all-encompassing 
strategy. This is why Transparency International developed the concept of National Integrity System 
(NIS) assessments in 2001. The purpose of a National Integrity System assessment is to assess 
systemic corruption risks faced by a country and produce a set of recommendations on how to 
mitigate those risks in the future. Those recommendations can then be used by actors in civil 
society, government and the private sector for promoting integrity and creating defences against 
corruption in the country. In order to be effective and sustained, the prevention of corruption must be 
considered a responsibility of leaders and communities in all areas of society; it is task that falls on 
many rather than any one individual. 
In 2012, Transparency International signed a grant agreement with the Government of Curaçao to 
undertake the National Integrity System assessment on the island. To date, assessments have been 
completed in more than 100 countries around the world, including in Latin America, the Caribbean, 
Europe, Asia and Africa. 
 
The assessment focuses on an evaluation of the key public institutions and non-state actors in a 
country’s governance system with regard to (1) their overall capacity, (2) their internal governance 
systems and procedures, and (3) their role in the overall integrity system. The assessment examines 
both the formal legal framework of each pillar and the actual institutional practice. The analysis 
highlights discrepancies between the formal provisions and reality on the ground, making it clear 
where there are gaps in the integrity system. The assessment concentrates on the institutions at the 
country level, and only refers to the Kingdom level where this is thought to be relevant to improve 
understanding of the integrity system of the country as it stands today. 
The assessment process in Curaçao has been consultative and seeks to involve key stakeholders 
on the island. Transparency International staff visited Curaçao in September 2012 and again in April 
2013 to meet with the local research team and various experts from all of the principal institutions 
involved in the assessment. All discussions have been constructive and well attended by most 
stakeholders, who appeared to place high importance on the dialogue. 
It is Transparency International’s hope that the Curaçao assessment will generate a set of concrete 
recommendations for the island’s key institutions and local actors to pursue in order to strengthen 
transparency, accountability and integrity. It should also provide a set of good governance 
benchmarks for the citizens of Curaçao to hold their government and elected officials to account 
through public dialogue, policy engagement and voting. 
 
National Integrity System context  
 
Any country’s National Integrity System is deeply embedded in the country’s overall social, political, 
economic and cultural context. In Curaçao, society can be characterised by the absence of a strong 
middle class, roughly dividing the country into ‘haves’ and ‘have nots’. The country is – or at least 
was in 2009 – also strongly divided over the desired level of influence the Kingdom is to have in 
local affairs, which clearly marked the following elections, and went hand in hand with a change in 
the political landscape. Political parties are not sufficiently able to effectively overcome these and 
other divisions in the political sphere. The dominance of party discipline governs both acts of 
members of Parliament as well as those of the Executive, blurring the constitutionally-prescribed 
division of powers. As a result, the Curaçao National Integrity System contains insufficient 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
13 
CURAÇAO 
 

 
 
 
National Integrity System pillars  
 
 
The judiciary, the Ombudsman and the supreme audit and supervisory institutions (public 
9
sector) are three of the strongest institutions of the Curaçao National Integrity System. This finding 
is very important as it shows that the institutions which typically are entrusted to provide oversight 
and uphold the rule of law have relatively high levels of integrity. This study shows that they are 
largely independent and considered adequately resourced. They have the potential to effectively 
create a system of checks-and-balances over the public, private and social sectors of the country 
and serve as a key defence against impunity. Also, the instruction issued by the Kingdom Council of 
Ministers on the recommendation of the Board of Financial Supervision stands out as one of the few 
illustrations since October 2010 of effective oversight of the Executive’s activities in practice. 
 
9
 This pillar assesses the Curaçao Court of Audit (ARC – Algemene Rekenkamer Curaçao), the 
Foundation Administration’s Accountant’s Bureau (SOAB – Stichting Overheidsaccountantsbureau) and 
the Board of Financial Supervision (Cft – College financieel toezicht).    
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
15 
CURAÇAO 
 

appointments in the sector as well as its output. Both the Executive’s hands-on approach as well as 
its passive form of not taking action limit the capacity of the public sector to operate effectively. The 
specific circumstances of the new constitutional relations, requiring two executive layers to be 
merged into one, have not enhanced the sector’s performance so far, and have done little to further 
transparency, accountability and integrity. They have also prevented the public sector from 
effectively addressing anti-corruption issues through public education, cooperation with third parties 
and increased efforts to safeguard integrity in public procurement.  
That said, in many respects, the public sector does have several already fairly robust governance 
provisions, and the issue is one of implementation. For example, as of yet, there are no effective 
mechanisms to enforce the new integrity rules, and so far no confidants (vertrouwenspersonen) 
have been appointed to allow civil servants to address integrity issues within the administration on a 
confidential basis. Moreover, positions involving confidentiality (vertrouwensfuncties) have not yet 
been classified as such. Meanwhile Dutch development funds allocated to support good governance 
have dried up. Most money has already been spent or, because it was not spent in the projected 
time frame, is no longer available. Public companies and public foundations face important issues 
with transparency and accountability, and neither the letter nor the spirit of the corporate governance 
code in place is yet fully observed. 
The supervisory institutions of the private sector, which include the Central Bank of Curaçao 
and Sint Maarten (CBCS), the Gaming Control Board (GCB) and the Financial Intelligence Unit 
(MOT – Meldpunt Ongebruikelijke Transacties), show a mixed track record. The weakest link in this 
pillar, no doubt, is the lack of any supervision on gaming activities other than those conducted by the 
country’s casinos. That said, the casino supervisor, GCB, is only doing slightly better. In particular 
the operational independence of the GCB from the casino sector has been called into question, 
while provisions to ensure the transparency and accountability of the GCB are notable by their 
absence. The legal framework to ensure that CBCS and MOT are answerable for their actions, on 
the other hand is relatively strong, although provisions to hold the supervisors accountable for the 
use of their supervisory and sanctioning powers could be improved. For CBCS, the most pressing 
challenge is the lack of effective communication between the different relevant actors which means 
that accountability of CBCS is currently not ensured. This is particularly important to counter-balance 
the necessary operational independence of the Bank. Moreover, although the legal framework 
allows for effective integrity supervision of the private sector, due to a lack of publicly-available 
information – or, in MOT’s case, simply because its supervisory activities have only just started – the 
effectiveness of the supervisors’ activities in practice cannot be assessed. 
In terms of law enforcement agencies, the public prosecutor’s commitment to fighting corruption is 
undermined by limited financial and human resources available to the police, particularly in the field 
of combating financial crime. Likewise, the existing financial and human resources of the 
Landsrecherche – Curaçao’s special police force dedicated to investigating possible criminal 
conduct of government officials and civil servants – are minimal and fully insufficient to effectively 
carry out its duties. This seriously undermines the ability of the law enforcement agencies to 
adequately prosecute corruption cases, which are often complicated and time-consuming, and 
require special expertise. Institutional mistrust within an agency between law enforcement officials 
and also with other law enforcement agencies, and a lack of coordination also negatively affects the 
ability of law enforcement agencies to detect and investigate corruption cases. Finally, the 
confidential nature of corruption investigations also limits the ability of the Public Prosecutor’s Office 
to adequately inform the public, who often do not know whether corruption cases are being 
investigated and if so, what is involved.  
This lack of transparency fuels allegations of a lack of prosecution in the media coverage in 
Curaçao. The media have to some extent contributed to raising awareness of the problem of 
corruption, but, positive exceptions notwithstanding, reports are often limited, biased and of poor 
quality. There is an insufficient number of trained journalists and the area of investigative journalism 
is virtually non-existent. Moreover, because media companies to a large extent depend on financiers 
and the advertising market, ‘subtle exertion of influence’ on media content does occur. This 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
17 
CURAÇAO 
 

IV. COUNTRY PROFILE: 
FOUNDATIONS FOR THE 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM 
Curaçao is located in the Caribbean Sea, approximately 60 kilometres (35 miles) off the 
northwestern coast of Venezuela. The population is around 150,000. The official languages are 
10
Papiamentu, Dutch and English. Spanish is widely spoken. 
The first Europeans, led by the Spanish explorer – and lieutenant of Columbus – Alfonso de Ojeda, 
arrived in 1499 in Curaçao. By then Curaçao was inhabited by the Caquetio Indians. The island 
th
remained under Spanish control until the Dutch conquest of 1634. At the beginning of the 19 
century the island Curaçao fell into English hands, but the Dutch once again took Curaçao into their 
th th
possession in 1816. During the 17 and 18 century, the West Indian Company (WIC), a chartered 
company of Dutch merchants, established many trade posts in the West Indies, including Curaçao. 
Africans were enslaved from their homeland and transported to Curaçao, where they were sold to 
plantation owners from across the Americas. The remaining slaves fulfilled the labour needs on 
plantations and in the urban area they performed activities in households, in the trade and the 
construction sector (to build forts and houses). In 1863 slavery in the Dutch West-Indian colonies 
was abolished.  
The country The Netherlands Antilles (1954-2010) 
 
‘Curaçao and subordinates’, as the six-island group in the Caribbean Sea was called during the 
Dutch colonial period, left its colonial status behind in 1954. The islands became an autonomous 
entity within the Kingdom of the Netherlands, as part of the Netherlands Antilles consisting of six 
11
islands: Aruba, Bonaire, Curaçao, Saba, Sint Eustatius and Sint Maarten. The Charter (het Statuut) 
12
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands is the leading document in which the autonomy or self- 
governing of these islands is organised. The islands as a federation became responsible for their 
internal affairs, while nationality, foreign relations, defence and cassation were the jurisdiction of the 
Kingdom as a whole. In 1986 Aruba severed ties with the Netherlands Antilles and became an 
autonomous country within the Kingdom. 
The country Curaçao (2010-) 
 
The demand for more autonomy also increased in Curaçao. This resulted in a referendum in April 
2005, whereby citizens of Curaçao could express themselves on the position of the island within the 
 
10
 In the majority of households Papiamentu is spoken (78 per cent), followed by Dutch (9 per cent), 
Spanish (5 per cent) and English (6 per cent). Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS), Census 2011. 
(Willemstad: Central Bureau of Statistics Curaçao, 2005).  
11
 The Kingdom of the Netherlands consisted of three constituent parts: the Netherlands, the Netherlands 
Antilles and Suriname. In 1975 Suriname separated from the Kingdom and became an independent 
republic. 
12
 State Gazette of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, 1954, No. 503. The Statuut came into effect in 15 
December 1954. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
19 
CURAÇAO 
 

18
politicians who donate campaign promotion materials and promise favors. Poverty is therefore an 
19
important condition for the survival of this political patronage system. In the second place, critics 
argue that the electoral system does not function well in Curaçao. The identification of the voter is 
principally with the party leader and not with those who in Parliament will ultimately represent the 
voter. In addition, in recent years there have been a few occasions on which a coalition lost its 
majority in Parliament due to the fact that members left their political fraction to join the opposition 
(zetelroof). (Also refer to Chapter VII.1 Legislature.) 
Since 2000 Curaçao has voted ten times for a government: six times for the Parliament of the former 
Netherlands Antilles, three times for the Parliament of the Island of Curaçao prior to its own 
20
autonomy, and once as the autonomous country of Curaçao. During this period, a full four-year 
term has never been completed. In the same period (2000-2012) the Netherlands has had seven 
21
cabinets with more than ten different ministers acting as minister of the interior and kingdom 
relations. So far, the new country Curaçao has had four cabinets. This political instability at the 
different levels has hampered efforts to instil a culture of good governance and anti-corruption.  
Due to the small size of the island and the personal ties of ministers with the population, 
professional and personal roles are often intertwined. In the political culture, personal factors, such 
as family and neighborhood ties, are often more important than substantive and ideological factors. 
Moreover, having friends and family who are members of political parties can help in securing key 
22
positions in public administration and state-owned companies. Likewise, such connections can 
help to obtain certain services and favours from government and state-owned companies. Without 
23
knowing the right people, it can take a lot of time and effort to get things done. This dependency 
means that people in key positions in the public sector are not always held accountable by citizens 
for mismanagement and/or unlawful actions.  
24 25
Civil rights are guaranteed in the Constitution and other laws, although those rights are not 
always protected. The US Department of State’s 2011 Country Report on Human Rights states that 
Curaçao authorities believed that some migrant labourers may have been forced to work in 
construction, landscaping and shops. Moreover, the reports states that prison conditions are 
substandard in some respects, for example there is not sufficient capacity to separate facilities for 
26
juvenile offenders. Another inspection report shows that victims of crime do not always get the 
27
support they need. The ability of citizens to seek redress for the violation of their rights is often 
 
18
 Peter Verton, Good governance and political patronage (Deugdelijkheid bestuur en politieke patronage) 
in: René Römer als inspirator (Curaçao: University of the Netherlands Antilles, 2006) p.215 and Telegraaf, 
Stanley Brown noemt onafhankelijkheid gekkkenwerk ‘Wiels gevaarlijk projectiel’, 27 October 2012. 
19
 Obernon Nauta, Good governance in the West (Goed bestuur in de West), p.168 (Oisterwjk: Uitgeverij 
BOXPress, 2011), René Römer, Beeldvorming en politiek and James Schrills, Emancipatie en onze 
politieke cultuur, in: Emancipatie & Acceptatie, Curaçao en Curaçaoënaars (Amsterdam: Uitgeverij SWP, 
2003). 
20
 Gert J. Oostindie ed., Shared Kingdom (Gedeeld Koninkrijk, De ontmanteling van de Nederlandse 
Antillen en de vernieuwing van de trans Atlantische relaties) (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 
2012), p.15-16. 
21
 Cabinet Kok, Cabinet Balkenende I-II-III-IV, Cabinet Rutte I-II 
22
 Hardy A. Huisden & Brede Kristensen (red), A new country Curaçao (Een nieuw land Curaçao en alles 
wat daarbij komt kijken) (Amsterdam: Caribpublishing, 2012/ B.V. Uitgeverij SWP Amsterdam), p.97. 
23
 Eric R. de Vries, Speech Curaçao Bar (Rechtsstatelijkheid, Een toespraak naar aanleiding van de 
installatie van mr P.E. de Kort tot lid van het GHvJNAA.) via www.ordevanadvocaten.an see publications 
[accessed 10 January 2013]. 
24
 Constitution, Chapter 2.  
25
 The country is a party to the European Convention on Human Rights and subject to the jurisdiction of 
the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR). 
26
 United States Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2011. 
27
 Law Enforcement Council, The reporting process on Curaçao (Het aangifteproces op Curaçao), 
Inspection report of the Law Enforcement Council, May 2012, p.8. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
21 
CURAÇAO 
 

The fragmentation and polarisation of the society has roots in the history of slavery. Both during and 
after the abolition of slavery there was interdependence based on an unequal power relationship 
35
(patronage). For a long time colour and race remained central to social mobility. Today it seems 
that the society is mainly divided into ‘haves’ and ‘have nots’, and although society has become 
more diverse, economic wealth still often goes along with descent and colour.  
Furthermore, the society is divided over the level of involvement of the Netherlands. The debate on 
constitutional reform led to a referendum, held on 15 May 2009. The electorate was asked to accept 
(‘SI’) or reject (‘NO’) the ongoing process of constitutional reform. Fifty-two per cent of voters 
approved the negotiated agreements between Curaçao and the Netherlands and 48 per cent 
disapproved. These results have been interpreted at the popular level as reflecting the polarised 
36
views regarding the influence of the Netherlands in local affairs. In the eyes of many, the results of 
the referendum divided the society into a ‘Si’ and a ‘No’ camp, while others see it as a confirmation 
37
of a historical dichotomy, characterised by ethnicity and class. Recently, political leaders have 
38
emphasised the importance of unity of the society. Another division which is related to the point 
above concerns language. Until recently, all official documents were issued in Dutch. Recently more 
official political documents, for example the government programme, have been issued in 
Papiamentu. Moreover, there is a division between Papiamentu and Dutch language schools and 
between Papiamentu and Dutch language media.  
There are different interest groups which try to mediate between society and the political decision 
makers, but the link between Curaçao society and the political system is somewhat weak due to the 
weakness of political parties and of civil society organisations. (Also refer to Chapter VII.10 Political 
Parties and Chapter VII.12 Civil Society). The level of citizen participation in political party activities 
is low. Young people in particular have a tendency to disassociate themselves from politics. 
Moreover, in recent years, the number of civil society organisations has grown, but their ability to 
influence politics is low due to a lack of a broad social base, trust and financial support. Unions, 
39
government and the private sector are united in the Kolaborativo. This tripartite social dialogue 
platform includes the national and central representations of the unions, the Association of Business 
of Curaçao (VBC) and the Chamber of Commerce and Industry. It tries to serve as a link between 
society and the state, but with the changes in the political landscape in 2010 Kolaborativo 
experiences a lack of cooperation from the government.  
Socio-economic foundations 
 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC SITUATION OF THE COUNTRY SUPPORTIVE TO AN EFFECTIVE 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM? 
 
There are some serious concerns about the country’s socio-economic situation. Curaçao 
faces significant challenges, particularly in terms of education, employment and poverty.  
 
The economy of Curaçao is dominated by tourism and financial services. Other important economic 
sectors are oil refining and international trade, including trade through and in the economic zones in 
the seaport and the airport. As Curaçao is situated at the crossroads of major shipping routes, 
 
35
 Allen, 2007:27. 
36
 R. Allen, 210:118. 
37
 Allen, 2010:119. 
38
 ‘We have to create unity’ (We moeten eenheid creëren) 8 October 2012 via www.versgeperst.com 
[accessed 11 January 2013]. 
39
 Kolaborativo applies internationally formal dialogue strategies, as laid down by the International Labour 
Organization. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
23 
CURAÇAO 
 

in the past 50 years. This implies that rising health care and pension costs will have to be funded for 
an aging population by an ever-shrinking workforce. Thirdly, the unemployment rate is relatively 
52
high: 10 per cent in 2011 (and youth unemployment as high as 30 per cent). While women excel in 
53
the educational environment, more women than men are unemployed. 
Fortunately there are also reasons to be optimistic about the economic future of Curaçao. Since the 
beginning of 2013, the transition Cabinet-Hodge has taken important measures to restore fiscal 
stability. Once the budget is balanced, government can borrow for capital expenditures for 
infrastructure at low interest rates due to the ‘triple A status’ of its Kingdom partner, which would 
54
give a boost to the economy. 
Furthermore, a recent report on long-term economic development in Curaçao suggests that average 
annual rates above 2.5 per cent or 3 per cent for Curaçao’s long-term GDP can be achieved – by 
moving to higher skills associated with higher productivity of labour force and improving ‘investment 
attractiveness’ and the business environment – as observed in other benchmark countries, for 
55
example Trinidad & Tobago, Barbados, Bahamas and Singapore. 
 
Socio-cultural foundations 
 
Score: 25 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THE PREVAILING ETHICS, NORMS AND VALUES IN SOCIETY SUPPORTIVE TO AN 
EFFECTIVE NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM? 
 
Mistrust, a lack of responsibility and a culture of fear are not uncommon in Curaçao. 
However, awareness of the importance of good governance is growing.  
Due to multiculturalism in the Curaçaoan society, it is difficult to speak about one predominant 
culture. Nevertheless there are some values and norms that are shared by at least a substantial 
portion of the population. In general the culture of Curaçao is inward-looking which is expressed in a 
56
strong identification with the territory and a sense of ‘difference’ from others in the world. Some 
57
observers consider that this outlook obstructs development. 
Curaçao is shaped to some degree by a history of conquest, colonialism, slavery, the Roman 
58
Catholic Church, the Royal Dutch Shell and donor relations. These developments have caused a 
59
tradition of patronage, concentration of power and resistance. As a result, there is a significant lack 
of interpersonal trust and a culture of fear. This gives people in high-ranking positions a great deal of 
 
52
 Ibid. 
53
 Unicef, 2013. 
54
 Lecture by Age Bakker, chair of the Board of Financial Supervision (Cft), University of the Netherlands 
Antilles 28 January 2013. 
55
 TAC, Applied Economic & Financial Research, Strategies for sustainable Long Term Economic 
Development in Curaçao, 12 May 2012, p.6. 
56
 Gert Oostindie ed., Small scale and quality of governance, 2006:15-16. 
57
 Speech E. Tromp: The state of Curaçao’s economy – developments and vulnerabilities, Willemstad, 20 
May 2011. 
58
 Verton, 2006:213. 
59
 Allen, 2007:27. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
25 
CURAÇAO 
 

V. CORRUPTION PROFILE 
th
The first examples of corruption in Curaçao that can be found in the literature go back to the 17 
67
century. The trade between Europe and the Caribbean, driven by the West Indian Company, went 
along with illegal trade with the Spanish and French enemy and smuggling of, for example, stockfish 
wood, lime, salt, alcohol and weapons. Governance and judiciary were in one hand, patronage, 
nepotism and slavery were considered to be normal. Three centuries later, Curaçao became a 
transit area between drug-producing and drug-consuming countries. The well-connectedness with 
the other countries in the Kingdom of the Netherlands played an important role in this regard. 
Moreover, in general in the Caribbean, the long coastlines of the islands, the porous borders and 
limited law enforcement capacity, poverty and unemployment have facilitated illegal trafficking 
68
activities. Illegal trade (such as the drugs trade) has a powerful corrupting force on the entire 
country, and in particular can have a corrupting effect on government officials, politicians, financial 
service providers, police and custom officers. As in other countries, police investigations in Curaçao 
show that in the majority of drugs cases, corruptive contacts with officials and/or civil servants 
69
exist.  
Although as a ‘frontier society’ Curaçao has a long history of corruption, for a long time there had 
been no openness in talking and writing about the subject. This situation changed at the end of the 
th
20 century. The number of investigations into corruption cases increased and ‘corruption’ was 
reported on more and more in the media. One well-known investigation was called the ‘Cliffhanger 
investigation’ (2003), which concerned three state-owned companies. Several politicians and 
officials were convicted of fraud, embezzlement and/or corruption. In the same period a public 
prosecutor with expertise in the field of financial crime was appointed, the special police force 
(Landsrecherche) became operational and a special fraud team, the Bureau for Financial 
Investigations (BFO-team), was established. Over the past 15 years, there have been several 
criminal investigations and convictions of politicians and high officials.  
However, empirically-based research on corruption in Curaçao is very limited, in particular with 
regard to international surveys and ratings which include Curaçao. Nevertheless, some studies are 
available.  
 
Perceptions of corruption 
 
In 2004, public perceptions of corruption in Curaçao were measured with the Transparency 
70
International ‘Global Corruption Barometer’. When asked about their first choice institution from 
which to eliminate corruption, 50 per cent of the Curaçaoan respondents answered political parties, 
11 per cent the judiciary and 10 per cent the education system. Respondents were not very 
optimistic about the levels of corruption in the future. Approximately 50 per cent of respondents 
expected corruption to decrease in the next three years. Almost half of the respondents (48 per 
cent) believed that corruption would increase a little or a lot. The majority of respondents indicated 
 
67
 Marjo Nederlof, Eerlijckman 1680-1713, In service of the army of State and the West-Indian Compagnie 
(In dienst van het Staatse leger en West-Indische Compagnie) (Curaçao: De Curaçaose Courant, 2008). 
68
 International Narcotics Control Board, Report of the International Narcotics Control Board for 2010 
International Narcotics Control Board (New York: United Nations, 2010), p.56. 
69
 Security Plan Curaçao (Plan Veiligheid Curaçao, naar een veilige voor de burgers van Curaçao) (s.l.: 
December 2008), p.31. 
70
 CBS, Perception of corruption: Bonaire and Curaçao 2004 (Perceptie van corruptie: Curaçao en 
Bonaire 2004) (Willemstad: Central Bureau of Statistics Curaçao, 2005). 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
27 
CURAÇAO 
 

general category of crime, there is no clear picture of the extent of the corruption and integrity 
78
problem in Curaçao.  
Curaçao’s special police force established as a unit for the former Netherlands Antilles in 1996, and 
dedicated to investigate possible criminal conduct of government officials and public servants, 
79
registered nine bribing cases in the period 1997-2005. In 2012, the special police force registered 
16 investigations into integrity issues of civil servants in 2012, of which only one was a bribery 
80
case. Preliminary findings of an academic study report about 10 corruption court cases in appeal 
81
between 2008 and 2011 in Curaçao. The majority of those cases involved suspected corruptive 
activities by civil servants working in the police force, customs and the prison. In one case, the 
corruptive act involved a decision of a high-level government official. 
82
Another study, the Plan Veiligheid Curaçao 2008 also underscored the fact that there are few 
quantitative data on corruption. The researchers of this study traced 14 corruption-related cases in 
the databases of the Public Prosecutor’s Office, over the entire period between 1997 and 2005, but 
concluded that ‘the available (hard) knowledge is limited, fragmented and, according to experts, only 
83
the tip of the iceberg’.  
84
The Crime Analysis of Curaçao 2008 confirms the lack of information about the extent of 
85
corruption. According to those interviewed for this analysis, corruption in Curaçao is not a systemic 
86
feature of departments of the administration, but concerns ‘individual missteps’. A public 
prosecutor interviewed estimates that there have been some 50 bribery cases involving civil 
servants over the past 10 years. Two types of corruption are mentioned as the most common in 
87
practice: support in drug transactions and document fraud. The political aspect of corruption cases 
is also underscored in the study, and illustrated by reference to the offering of jobs, permits and 
88
contracts to secure political support and finances for political campaigns. According to the Crime 
Analysis, those practices result in too much dependency of high officials and politicians on financiers 
and voters, which undermines their critical stance and their ability to act if they need to address 
89
irregularities or enforce compliance.  
An overall summary of the corruption profile of Curaçao, then, should take in account that little 
research has been done regarding the levels, forms, types, manifestations and location of corrupt 
practices. Due to a lack of information about the nature and extent of corruption, there is a gap 
between the perception of corruption and the number of cases actually being prosecuted. Another 
gap concerns the political and media attention paid to integrity (or the lack thereof) in the public 
sector, compared to the attention given to that subject in the private sector. The latter is much lower 
on the political agenda in Curaçao and there is little public and political involvement to secure 
integrity in the business sector.  
As will be discussed in the relevant chapters of the report, allegations of corruption in Curaçao are 
often speculative. As long as they remain assertions without proof, they damage the image of 
people and institutions, and create great unrest and a negative image of Curaçao. On the other 
 
78
 Ibid. p. 287-288. 
79
 Ibid. 287. 
80
 Annual report Landsrecherche, 2012, p.9.  
81
 P.C.M. Schotborgh-van de Ven, Phd study in progress, The causes of fraud and corruption in the Dutch 
Caribbean. 
82
 KLPD, Crime analyses of Curaçao 2008 (Criminaliteitsbeeld analyse van Curaçao 2008) (Zoetermeer: 
Korps Landelijke Politiediensten, Dienst IPOL, 2009). 
83
 Plan Veiligheid Curaçao, 2008: 31.  
84
 KLPD, 2009. 
85
 Ibid.: 136. 
86
 Ibid.: 137. 
87
 Ibid.: 137. 
88
 Ibid.: 154. 
89
 Ibid.: 140-143. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
29 
CURAÇAO 
 

VI. ANTI-CORRUPTION ACTIVITIES 
This chapter provides a brief overview of anti-corruption reforms and activities that have had 
a direct impact on Curaçao’s National Integrity System as it stands now.  
Anti-corruption measures 
 
Curaçao introduced a ‘good governance’ policy at the end of the last century. The basis for the 
90
policy is the report Konfiansa (1999) and the Policy and Administration Instruments Project 
(Project Beleids- en Beheersinstrumentarium – BBI). The recommendations listed in Konfiansa were 
geared towards improving transparency, responsiveness and accountability and referred to the 
concept of good governance as included in Article 43.1 of the Charter of the Kingdom of the 
Netherlands (Statuut). The goals of the Policy and Administration Instruments Project (BBI) were 
formulated in more instrumental terms, and focused on technical, administrative, organisational and 
91
human resources conditions.  
A few years later, the Co-operative Programme for Administrative Development 
92
(Samenwerkingsprogramma Bestuurlijke Ontwikkeling – SBO 2002-2007) was implemented to 
further contribute to the development of good governance. The total budget of the programme 
93 94
amounted to more than NAf 100 million, that is, about US$ 56 million. The programme focused 
on the reinforcement and improvement of the quality of the public administration in the Netherlands 
Antilles. This programme was followed by another project, the Project Institutional Reinforcement 
Administration (Institutionele Versterking Bestuurskracht – IVB 2008-2012), the aim of which was 
good governance, anchored in the organisations of Pais Kòrsou, with measurable results and visible 
for the society. The IVB 2008-2012 programme included the intention to introduce an ‘Independent 
Integrity Office’ in Curaçao, a registration point or hotline for integrity issues (Meldpunt Integriteit). 
The functions of this office were to be registration, investigation and the provision of advice on 
95
integrity issues, broadly defined and including but not restricted to corruption. Between 2007 and 
96
2009, the Island Government of Curaçao cooperated with the Bureau Integrity Amsterdam from 
the Netherlands. The Bureau shared its knowledge and expertise and conducted several activities in 
97
Curaçao, for example, the design of different integrity policies for the Island Administration and the 
Police. Recently, the government did conclude a new cooperation agreement with the city of 
98
Amsterdam, the scope of which includes integrity issues.  
Another major programme, the Social Economic Initiative (Sociaal Economisch Initiatief – SEI) also 
included projects geared towards good governance. The total budget of the Project Institutional 
 
90
 Konfiansa, administrative improvement and integrity (Konfiansa, bestuurlijke verbetering en integriteit), 
Bureau Constitutional Affairs, February 1999. 
91
 Evaluation Co-operative programme for Administrative Development Netherlands Antilles, 2002-2006 
(Evaluatie samenwerkingsprogramma bestuurlijke ontwikkeling Nederlandse Antillen 2002-2007), 
ECORYS Nederland BV, Rotterdam, 29 June 2007, p.19. (Below: Evaluation SBO 2002-2006.) 
92
 The SBO programme was a co-production of the Netherlands and the Netherlands Antilles and derived 
subsidies from USONA. In Chapter 5 a summary of the SBO programme can be found. 
93
 NAf stands for Netherlands Antillean guilder. 
94
 Ecorys, Evaluation SBO 2002-2006:19. 
95
 USONA Project proposal 2009, Sustaining the integrity and service mindedness of government, 2010-
2012 (Verankering van de Integriteit en Klantgerichtheid van de overheid (EGC), 2010-2012), p.10. 
96
 Cf. the website of the Bureau Integrity Amsterdam, via www.amsterdam.nl/gemeente/organisatie-
diensten/integriteit-0/ [accessed 8 June 2013]. 
97
 Cooperation agreement Island Territory Curaçao and the municipality Amsterdam (Overeenkomst tot 
samenwerking tussen het Eilandgebied Curaçao en de gemeente Amsterdam), 30 August 2007. 
98
 ‘Cooperation Curacao and Amsterdam prolonged’ (Samenwerking Curaçao en Amsterdam verlengd), 2 
May 2013, via www.kkcuracao.com [accessed 8 June 2013]. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
31 
CURAÇAO 
 

the Council of Europe. The group helps countries to identify deficiencies in national anti-corruption 
policies, prompting the necessary legislative, institutional and practical reforms. GRECO also 
102
provides a platform for the sharing of best practices in the prevention and detection of corruption.  
103
On the other hand, the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption (Strasbourg, 1999) and the 
104
additional Protocol was signed by the Kingdom of the Netherlands, but has not yet been ratified 
on behalf of Curaçao. This convention requires countries to establish criminal and other offences to 
cover a wide range of acts of corruption if these are not already crimes under domestic law.  
105
Moreover, the United Nations Convention against Corruption (New York, 2003) and the 
Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions 
106
(OESO-Convention, Paris 1997) have not yet been ratified on behalf of Curaçao. The first 
convention is, inter alia, dedicated to prevention, with measures directed at both the public and 
private sectors. These include model preventive policies, such as the establishment of anti-
corruption bodies and enhanced transparency in the financing of election campaigns and political 
107
parties. The second convention, the Anti-Bribery Convention, establishes legally-binding 
standards to criminalise bribery of foreign public officials in international business transactions, and 
provides for a host of related measures that make this effective. Thus, this international anti-
108
corruption instrument focuses on the ‘supply side’ of the bribery transaction. 
Currently, the Government of Curaçao is working on finalising the relevant legislation needed for the 
Kingdom of the Netherlands to ratify these treaties for Curaçao. An important step in this process 
109
was the introduction of a new Penal Code in 2011. A new Code of Criminal Procedure, which is, 
for example, important to ratify the United Nations Convention against Corruption, is in the making.  
The new Penal Code contains dedicated chapters on crimes and offences committed by civil 
servants, ministers, members of Parliament and judges in their official capacity. Punishable offences 
110
include criminal offences such as bribery, abuse of authorities, extortion, and fraud, as well as 
lesser offences such as making public confidential information or withholding government 
111
property. Perpetrators of public bribery can be sentenced for a maximum of two, four or six years 
of imprisonment and be fined NAf 25,000 (US$ 13,800), depending on the exact type of corruption. 
The most severe punishment concerns a corrupt judge, with a maximum imprisonment of nine years 
and a maximum fine of NAf 100,000 (US$ 55,200). Private-to-private bribery is also outlawed in the 
112
new Penal Code and can be sentenced by a maximum of three years’ imprisonment and a fine of 
NAf 25,000. (US$ 13,800). 
In addition to these changes in criminal law, important steps have been taken to strengthen the legal 
framework towards good governance of the public sector. In the run-up to the constitutional changes 
 
102
 Council of Europe, www.coe.int/t/dghl/monitoring/greco/general/3.%20what%20is%20greco_EN.asp 
[accessed 6 June 2013]. 
103
 Criminal law convention on corruption, 27 January 1999. Ratification on 11 April 2002 by the Kingdom 
of the Netherlands for the Netherlands, Tractatenblad 2002, No.109. Also see Tractatenblad 2010, 
No.322. 
104
 Additional protocol to the criminal law convention in corruption, 15 May 2003. Ratification on 16 
November 2005 by the Kingdom of the Netherlands for the Netherlands, Tractatenblad 2006, No.4. Also 
see Tractatenblad 2010, No.323. 
105
 United Nations Convention against Corruption, New York, 31 October 2003. Ratification on 30 
November 2006 by the Kingdom of the Netherlands for the Netherlands, Tractatenblad, 2006, No.266. 
Also see Tractatenblad 2011, No.32. . 
106
 Convention on combating bribery of foreign public officials in international business transactions, 17 
December 1997. Ratified by the Kingdom of the Netherlands for the Netherlands on 12 January 2001, 
Tractatenblad 2001, No.50. Also see Tractatenblad 2011, No.196. 
107
 UNODC, www.unodc.org/unodc/en/treaties/CAC/ [accessed 6 June 2013]. 
108
 OECD-Convention, www.oecd.org/corruption/oecdantibriberyconvention.htm [accessed 6 June 2013]. 
109
 Penal Code, Country Gazette 2010, No.48. 
110
 Penal Code, Book 2, Title XXVIII. 
111
 Penal Code, Book 3, Title VIII. 
112
 Penal Code, Book 2, Title XXV. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
33 
CURAÇAO 
 

VII.1 LEGISLATURE 
STRUCTURE AND ORGANISATION  
Before the change in constitutional relations, Curaçao had its representatives in the Parliament of 
the Netherlands Antilles. It also had its own local representative body, the Island Council 
(Eilandsraad). In October 2010, the Island Council was dissolved and its 21 members, elected in the 
election of August 2010, made up Curaçao’s first Parliament (Staten). This Parliament is to 
119
represent ‘the entire people of Curaçao’ Constitutionally, Parliament has two main tasks. 
Parliament is to adopt legislation together with government, and Parliament is to scrutinise the work 
120
of the government when executing its legally-granted powers. 
The present Parliament is a 21-seat, single-chamber body elected every four years, barring early 
121
dissolution. The general principles of the authorities, responsibilities and tasks of Curaçao’s 
Parliament are set out in the Constitution, while more specific rules are laid down in the 
122
parliamentary Rules of Procedure. The latter is Parliament’s internal regulation, binding 
123
Parliament and members of Parliament, but without legal force for third parties, such as ministers.  
Members of Parliament elected on the basis of the same electoral list are considered to be members 
of one and the same parliamentary group (fractie). Individual members of Parliament may, however, 
124
step out of those groups and make up new groups or join another group. Parliament convenes in 
plenary sessions in which it takes its formal decisions, as well as in the preparatory Central 
125
Committee, equally comprised of all members of Parliament. Parliament also has several standing 
committees to facilitate oversight of the different ministries, as well as one for Kingdom Affairs and 
126
Interparliamentary Relations. Other committees are the committee to investigate the credentials of 
incoming members of Parliament (Geloofsbrieven) and the Domestic Committee (Huishoudelijke 
127
Commissie). Parliament’s new Rules of Procedure now also explicitly mention the ‘College van 
Senioren’, an advisory body whose members are the chairpersons of the groups represented in 
128
Parliament.  
In October 2012, the first election for the Curaçao Parliament was held. The parties elected in 
Parliament were Pueblo Soberano (PS) with five seats, Movementu Futuro Korsou (MFK) with five 
seats, Partido Alternativa Real (PAR) with four seats, Partido pa Adelanto i Inovashon Soshal 
 
119
 Constitution of Curaçao (Staatsregeling van Curaçao), Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, No.86, Article 
39. 
120
 Ibid., Chapters 4 and 6. 
121
 Ibid., Articles 40 and 41. 
122
 Country decree Publication Rules of Procedure Parliament of Curaçao (Landsbesluit tot 
openbaarmaking van de Beschikking van de 10de oktober 2010 van de Staten van Curaçao, houdende 
vaststelling van de herziene versie van het Reglement van Orde voor de Staten van Curaçao), Country 
Gazette 2012, No.50. 
123
 Council of State, ‘RvA No. RA/14-12-DIV Request to the Council of State for advice on the provision of 
information to Parliament by public entities (limited liability companies, foundations and legal persons 
instituted by public law)’ (Verzoek aan de Raad van Advies om advies inzake verstrekking van inlichtingen 
aan de Staten door overheidsentiteiten (naamloze vennootschappen, stichtingen en bij wet ingestelde 
rechtspersonen)) (Curaçao: Council of State, 20 November 2012a).  
124
 Rules of Procedure for the Parliament of Curaçao (Landsbesluit van de 8ste augustus 2012, 
no.12/3799, tot openbaarmaking van de beschikking van de 10de oktober 2010 van de Staten van 
Curaçao, houdende vaststelling van de herziene versie van het Reglement van Orde voor de Staten van 
Curaçao), Country Gazette 2012, No.50, Articles 14 to 16.  
125
 Rules of Procedure, Article 29. 
126
 Ibid., Article 45. 
127
 Ibid., Article 3. 
128
 Ibid., Article 11 to 13, and the explanatory memorandum on those articles.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
35 
CURAÇAO 
 

government. It is also responsible for the drafting of Parliament’s budget and annual accounts as 
133
well as for the day-to-day management of Parliament’s finances.  
Parliament’s personnel budget is fixed at a maximum of 40 people, but in case this maximum is 
134
reached, Parliament may hire a maximum of an additional two temporary staff members. The 
secretary general of Parliament is one of the civil servants to be salaried according to the highest 
rank and salary scale, in line with the required educational level and expertise. He is also to receive 
135
a salary supplement to cover, inter alia, expenses of a representative nature.  
The Constitution also provides for salaries, pensions, and other financial provisions of members of 
136
Parliament, to be regulated by country ordinance adopted by a qualified majority. However, as 
yet, no such ordinance has been enacted and previous ordinances regulating the financial 
provisions of members of Parliament were not incorporated in the legislative framework of the 
137
country of Curaçao. Thus, at present, financial provisions available for members of Parliament are 
138
mostly unregulated. The most recent attempt to increase pensions – or, more precisely, pensions 
of members of the then Island Council – also failed, because five days before 10 October 2010 the 
governor annulled the adopted Island ordinance as ‘inconsistent with the general interest of the 
139
Kingdom’. 
More generally, Parliament’s budget is determined as part of the regular Curaçao budgetary 
process. In practice, this implies Parliament has a large say in the size of its budget, both because 
Parliament has the constitutional right of budget and because Parliament is positioned as one of 
140
Curaçao’s High Councils of State. Each year, the president of Parliament is to hand in his/her 
budget proposal to the minister of finance. The minister may amend the proposal, but, according to 
141
the Rules of Procedure, he/she may only do so in consultation with Parliament itself. As a more 
general, additional safeguard the government’s accounting regulations require the explanatory 
memorandum to the draft budget to include both the budget proposals put forward by High Councils 
142
of State as well as the budget as approved by the Council of Ministers.  
 
 
 
 
133
 Country ordinance Organisation and tasks of Parliament’s Administration, Article 6. Also refer to 
Country ordinance Legal position Secretary General of Parliament, the general part of the explanatory 
memorandum.  
134
 Country ordinance Organisation and tasks of Parliament’s Administration, Articles 3 and 4. 
135
 Country ordinance Legal position Secretary General of Parliament, Articles 4 and 5, and the general 
part of the explanatory memorandum. Also refer to Country ordinance Legal and material rights and 
obligations of civil servants Parliament (Landsverordening materieel ambtenarenrecht Staten), Official 
Curaçao Gazette 2010, No.87, Appendix v, Article 6. 
136
 Constitution, Article 52. 
137
 Cf. Appendix A of the Country ordinance changing the General transitional regulation legislation and 
government country Curaçao (Landsverordening tot wijziging van de Algemene overgangsregeling 
wetgeving en bestuur land Curaçao), Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, No.102. Also refer to Country 
ordinance Government accounts 2010 (Landsverordening Comptabiliteit 2010), Official Curaçao Gazette 
2010, No.87, Appendix b, Article 6. 
138
 Also refer to ‘Government working to correct legislation negative list’ (Regering werkt aan reparatie 
wetgeving negatieve lijst), Amigoe, 10 September 2011. 
139
 Decree of the Governor of the Netherlands Antilles of 5 October 2010 to annul the Island ordinance to 
change the pension regulation of members of the Island Council Curaçao (Besluit van 5 oktober 2010 tot 
vernietiging van de Eilandsverordening tot wijziging van de pensioenregeling Eilandsraadsleden Curaçao 
(A.B. 1975, no.37), zoals vastgesteld in de vergadering van de eilandsraad van het eilandgebied Curaçao 
van 3 September 2010), Country Gazette 2010, No.99. 
140
 Country ordinance Government accounts 2010, Article 1i; Constitution, Article 85.  
141
 Country ordinance Government accounts 2010, Articles 34 and 38 and the explanatory memorandum. 
Rules of Procedure, Article 21 and the explanatory memorandum. The Rules of Procedure require the 
draft budget to be handed over to the minister of General Affairs, cf. explanatory memorandum Article 21.  
142
 Country ordinance Government accounts 2010, Article 38.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
37 
CURAÇAO 
 

zonder last). The explanatory memorandum adds that this implies ‘it is not possible to give a 
145
constitutionally binding mandate to a member of Parliament’. The Constitution also details which 
public positions are not to be held simultaneously with that of member of Parliament, such as 
governor, minister and civil servant, and allows for the possibility to specify other public positions by 
146
country ordinance. Moreover, the Constitution also rules out membership of other High Councils 
147
of State and several positions within the judiciary. The Constitution also rules out blood relations 
148
between members of Parliament, but allows for other family ties. Spouses, however, cannot be 
149
members at the same time.  
Parliament also has the constitutional right of initiative and amendment, and may draft its own 
150
legislative proposals. In addition, the Constitution also grants members of Parliament certain 
immunity from prosecution because they – and others participating – cannot face any charges for 
what they say in sessions of Parliament or its committees, nor for any documents they have 
presented in those sessions. It is not limited to immunity for statements regarding the subject 
discussed in Parliament and it extends to both criminal prosecutions, disciplinary actions as well as 
civil litigation. However, it does not cover meetings of parliamentary groups or non-official 
151
parliamentary commissions, nor identical statements made outside Parliament. Also, law 
enforcement officers are not allowed to enter Parliament when in session without permission, except 
152
in those cases when someone is found in the act of committing an offence. Impeding a member of 
153
Parliament’s work is a highly punishable criminal offence.  
Moreover, Parliament is to elect its own president and deputy president, and, as of 2009, also 
decides for how long this appointment is to last. If a majority so desires, Parliament may dismiss the 
154
(deputy) president and elect another member of Parliament. The president of Parliament controls 
the appointment to committees of Parliament in consultation with the different parliamentary 
155
groups. With the change in constitutional relations, Parliament is now also able to appoint or 
156
contract its own staff and gained additional powers to control its own budget as High Council of 
157
State, without having to resort to a mandate to do so by the minister of finance. And although 
ministers do have a constitutional right of access to sessions of Parliament and take part in its 
158
deliberations, Parliament controls its own agenda, and the president is to convoke Parliament if 
159
he or she deems necessary or if three members of Parliament put in a request.  
However, Parliament’s independence is restricted by the fact that government has the constitutional 
authority to dissolve Parliament. Such a decision requires the government to call for new elections 
 
145
 Constitution, Articles 39 and 56.3 and the explanatory memorandum. Also refer to Council of State, 
‘RvA no. RA/30-12-LV Initiative draft country ordinance to adapt the Electoral Code Curaçao’ (RvA no. 
RA/30-12-LV Initiatief-ontwerplandsverordening tot wijziging van het Kiesreglement Curacao (A.B. 2010, 
no. 87) (Zitting 2011-2012-019)), (Curaçao, Council of State: 20 November 2012b). 
146
 Constitution, Article 45. Also refer to Article 51 and Articles 30 and 38.  
147
 Ibid., Article 45. 
148
 Ibid., Article 46. The official term is ‘consanquinity to the second degree’.  
149
 Marriage between member of Parliament after their election is permitted. 
150
 Ibid., Articles 77 and 78. 
151
 Ibid., Article 61 and the explanatory memorandum on that Article. Also refer to see L.J.J. Rogier, 
Principles of Caribean Constitutional Law (Beginselen van Caribisch Staatsrecht). (Den Haag: Boom 
Juridische Uitgevers, 2012), p.135; HR 17 June 2011, LJN BQ2302. 
152
 Code of Criminal Procedure (Wetboek van Strafvordering), Article 164. 
153
 Penal Code (Wetboek van Strafrecht), Book 2, Title IV Articles 2:41 and 2:42. Also refer to Book 3, 
Title II, Article 3:15. 
154
 Constitution, Article 50. Also: Rules of Procedure, Article 6 and the explanatory memorandum.  
155
 Rules of Procedure, Article 50 
156
 Constitution, Article 51 and Legal and material rights and obligations of civil servants Parliament, 
Article 7. Also refer to the Rules of Procedure, Article 17 and 18. 
157
 Country ordinance Government accounts 2010, Article 1 and Articles 34, 38, 39 and 40. Also refer to 
the Rules of Procedure, Article 21. Cf. ARC, November 2011.  
158
 Constitution, Article 58. 
159
 Rules of Procedure, Articles 33 and 64. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
39 
CURAÇAO 
 

of political party discipline significantly affects the room for manoeuvre of individual members of 
Parliament. In fact, several members of Parliament drafted an initiative bill proposal to further 
formalise this. The draft proposed to adapt the Electoral Code to prevent individual members of 
Parliament from keeping their seat in case of a break with the political party on whose list of 
candidates they were elected, unless they themselves had received a sufficient number of votes 
169
(zetelroof). The proposal was negatively advised upon by the Council of State (Raad van Advies), 
a High Council of State that advises both government and Parliament to ensure legislation satisfies 
170
the principles of a democratic rule of law. The Council noted that a ‘party political mandate’ would 
171
require amendment of the Constitution. Thus far, Parliament has not proposed to do so. However, 
several political parties have explicitly voiced their support for such a ‘party political mandate’, and 
implicitly or explicitly expect those elected via their list to give up their seat in Parliament in case of a 
172
break with the party. (Also refer to Chapter VII.10 Political Parties.)  
On the positive side, however, there are some instances in which Parliament does appear to take a 
more independent stance. This was, for example, the case when the coalition parties supporting the 
first Curaçao government voted on a motion to express their disapproval of the minister of finance’s 
policy, when it became clear that government was likely to be instructed by the Kingdom Council of 
173
Ministers to adapt its budgetary policy. Another example is when Parliament tried to summon 
directors of public companies to its sessions against the will of the Executive. (Also refer to the 
section on Role.) Individual members of Parliament, also, do in fact sometimes breach party 
discipline. As already mentioned above, in November 2012, a newly chosen member of Parliament 
left his parliamentary group to join sides with those parties who ended up forming a coalition 
government. Earlier, at the end of July 2012 and some two weeks after the instruction of the 
174
Kingdom Council of Ministers to the government of Curaçao, two members of Parliament of the 
then ruling parties left their respective parliamentary groups and joined the opposition. The coalition 
lost its majority in Parliament, and at the beginning of August, the cabinet handed in its resignation. 
175
Government also issued a decree to dissolve Parliament and called for new elections.  
What followed was, among other things, described as a ‘stalemate between the Executive and 
176 177 178
Parliament’, ‘a political impasse’, and ‘a parliamentary dictatorship’. Depending on one’s 
point of view, it illustrated Parliament’s own dysfunctioning or its strength. Parliament did not 
convene in plenary sessions for weeks, as the then president, a member of one of the coalition 
parties, annulled a scheduled parliamentary session, and suspended the next one before members 
179
of Parliament could deliberate on the situation and formally vote on a motion of no confidence. 
180
Where the president pointed to the risk of a ‘government vacuum’ (bestuursvacuum), the outgoing 
 
169
 Initiative draft country ordinance to amend the Electoral Code Curaçao. 
170
 Constitution, Article 64 and the explanatory memorandum. Also refer to country ordinance Council of 
State (Landsverordening Raad van Advies), Official Curaçao Gazette, 2010, No.87, Appendix q, Article 
20.  
171
 Council of State, 20 November 2012.  
172
 See for example MAN Rules of Procedure, Article 6; PAIS Rules of Procedure, Article 5.3.5. Also, for 
example, ‘I do not see any reason to put myself up for election’ (Ik zie geen reden om mij verkiesbaar te 
stellen), 17 January 2013, via www. versgeperst.com [accessed 22 May 2013].  
173
 Note, that, however, a more strongly-worded oppositional motion to vote a lack of confidence in the 
minister was not sufficiently supported. 
174
 On this, see Chapter VII.8 Supreme Audit and Supervisory Institutions (Public Sector). 
175
 Country decree of 3 August 2012, Curaçao Gazette 2012, No.3836.  
176
 Press notice of the Governor of Curaçao, as reported in ‘Governor asks for advice on request 
Parliament’ (Gouverneur vraagt advies inzake verzoek Staten), 30 August 2012, via 
www.versgeperst.com [accessed 5 April 2013]. 
177
 ‘Press notice Cabinet of the Governor of Curaçao. Conclusion advice mr C.M. Grüning and mr R.P. 
Koeijers’ (Persbericht Kabinet van de Gouveneur van Curaçao. Conclusie advies mr C.M. Grüning en mr 
R.P. Koeijers), 11 September 2012. 
178
 ‘Asjes suspends all Parliamentary sessions’ (Asjes schort alle parlementaire vergaderingen op), 24 
August 2012, via www.versgeperst.com [accessed 5 April 2013]. 
179
 ‘Members of Parliament powerless’ (Statenleden staan machteloos), 25 August 2012, via 
knipselkrantcuracao.wordpress.com [accessed10 April 2013]. 
180
 ‘Contributed: point of view Ivar Asjes request interim cabinet’ (Ingezonden: standpunt Ivar Asjes 
verzoek interim cabinet), 4 September 2012, via www.versgeperst.com [accessed 5 April 2013]. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
41 
CURAÇAO 
 

188
mandatory. The minutes of public sessions are to include, among other things, an overview of the 
incoming documents, an account of what has been said, voting records and a description of all 
announcements, notifications and proposals, as well as all decisions of the president of 
189
Parliament. Barring voting on nominations, commendations or appointments of persons – which 
are required to be in writing – if one member of Parliament requests such, votes may be taken by a 
190
roll call, requiring members of Parliament to cast their votes verbally.  
Parliament’s Administration is responsible for the provision of information over Parliament’s 
191
decisions, reports and other activities carried out or intended. However, there are hardly any 
192
explicit provisions which require Parliament to make documents public. For example, although 
agendas are required to be made public, there is no explicit provision to make parliamentary 
minutes or verbatim records available to the general public. Similarly, whereas parliamentary 
committees are to report to the Central Committee, which is to report to Parliament, there are no 
193
provisions which require Parliament to make these documents public. Also, with the exception of 
194
some provisions related to initiative draft ordinances, there are no legal requirements for 
Parliament to make draft bills or adopted legislative documents public. And, more generally, there 
are no provisions to make public all (non-confidential) documents exchanged between government 
and Parliament. There are no requirements to make any documents available on Parliament’s 
website.  
195
Parliament’s own Rules of Procedure, however, are required to be made public, and there are 
196
some provisions related to parliamentary inquiries to increase transparency. 
 
Transparency (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT CAN THE PUBLIC OBTAIN RELEVANT AND TIMELY INFORMATION ON THE ACTIVITIES AND 
DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES OF THE LEGISLATURE IN PRACTICE? 
 
People have access to public parliamentary meetings and are also able to follow those 
meetings via internet or radio broadcasts. Convocations of public parliamentary meetings 
are generally published in time. Most documents related to Parliament’s activities and 
decision-making processes are, however, more difficult to obtain, although recently internet 
access to several types of documents improved considerably.  
 
188
 Ibid., Articles 68 and 106; Country ordinance Organisation and tasks of Parliament’s Administration, 
Article 6 and the explanatory memorandum to the Country ordinance Legal position Secretary General of 
Parliament, general part.  
189
 Rules of Procedure, Articles 68 and 69. 
190
 Ibid., Articles 84 and 97. Also: Oberon Nauta, Good Governance in ‘The West’. Institutional and Social 
Constraints of Good Governance in the Caribbean Parts of the Dutch Kingdom (Goed bestuur in de West, 
Institutionele en maatschappelijke beperkingen voor goed bestuur in de Caribische rijksdelen) (Oisterwijk: 
Uitgeverij BOXPress 2011, 2011), p.44.  
191
 Country ordinance Organisation and tasks of Parliament’s Administration, Article 6. 
192
 Constitution, Article 62. 
193
 Rules of Procedure, Articles 31, 38 to 43, and Article 54. 
194
 See Country ordinance Council of State, which does require Parliament to publish the Council’s advice 
on an initiative draftordinance and its reaction on the advice and refers to Articles 9 and 11 of the Country 
ordinance on public access to government information (Landsverordening Openbaarheid van bestuur), 
Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, No.87, Appendix t. 
195
 Constitution, Article 62. 
196
 Rules of Procedure, Article 114. Also refer to Inquiry regulation (Enquêteregeling), Official Curaçao 
Gazette 2010, No.87, Appendix o.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
43 
CURAÇAO 
 

200
protection is a Kingdom affair. To safeguard this, the governor, in capacity as Kingdom organ, is 
to scrutinise legislation approved by Parliament for compliance with higher-order law. With the 
change in constitutional relations, the governor himself can no longer act on his findings in ways 
similar to when he was representative of the head of the government of the Netherlands Antilles, but 
201
may find reasons to bring matters to the attention of the Kingdom government. If the problem 
cannot be redressed within the country, as an ultimum remedium, the Kingdom government may act 
202
and, for example, suspend or annul the legislation concerned. (Also refer to Chapter VII.2 
Executive.)  
In addition, any country ordinance to change some specified provisions in the Curaçao Constitution, 
such as those relating to the fundamental rights and freedoms, the authorities of the governor, 
Parliament and the administration of justice, cannot enter into effect until the government of the 
203
Kingdom has signified its agreement. Moreover, at the country level, there is some possibility for 
constitutional review, as the court now has the authority to review the compatibility of country 
204
ordinances with the Constitution for fundamental human rights and freedoms. Nevertheless, 
205
according to one legal expert, and also voiced by others, this is ‘a step forward, but the step, 
206
although on paper perhaps impressive, is in practice of little importance’. In the majority of cases, 
Parliament is still able to take the law into its own hands and decide – by regular majority – whether 
207
or not a draft ordinance violates the Constitution.  
There are also several provisions to ensure accountability before Parliament approves legislation. 
Thus, as mentioned, Parliament is required to submit draft initiative legislation to the Council of 
State. Advices of the Council are not binding but do serve to hold the legislature accountable 
because they are – in principle – to be made public, and to be accompanied by a written reaction of 
208
Parliament. The Constitution also provides for the possibility to consult the public on draft country 
ordinances or a subject of ‘fundamental concern to society’ by means of a consultative referendum, 
209
although not a binding one. In addition, to provide Parliament with the necessary information, the 
Central Committee is authorised to, among other things, hold hearings, consult external experts and 
210
organise working visits. Similar provisions exist for other parliamentary committees.  
However, none of the provisions require Parliament to consult the public, except for, one might say, 
211
the requirement to elect the members of Parliament after or within four years. At the moment, 
there is no such thing as a citizen’s initiative, allowing citizens – under conditions – to put a subject 
 
200
Kingdom Act of 7 June 2010, regarding Regulations for the Governor of Curaçao (Rijkswet houdende 
Reglement voor de Gouverneur van Curaçao), Bulletin of Acts and Decrees 2010, No.341, Article 21. 
201
Ibid., Article 20. 
202
 Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands (Statuut voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden), 2010, 
Bulletin of Acts and Decrees 2010, No.775, Articles 43 and 50. For a description of the process 
envisioned with safeguarding the interests mentioned, see The Kingdom’s role of safeguarding. The 
safeguarding of rights and freedoms, legal certainty and good governance in the Kingdom of the 
Netherlands (Waarborgfunctie Koninkrijk. Het waarborgen van rechten en vrijheden, rechtszekerheid en 
deugdelijk bestuur in het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden), 15 July 2011, via www.rijksoverheid.nl [accessed 9 
April 2013]. 
203
 Charter for the Kingdom, Articles 42, 43 and 44. 
204
 Constitution, Article 101. 
205
 See, for example, Pueblo Soberano, Draft Constitution Curaçao (Concept Staatsregeling Curacao), 
Article 77; PAR, Crisis document. Ban pa Korsou awor!, p.26 and PAIS, Constitutional court needed 
quickly to prevent dictatorship (Constitutionele Kamer moet snel komen om dictatuur te voorkomen), 27 
August 2012.  
206
 J.Th. Wit, De democratische rechtsstaat Curaçao: kan het beter? Speech of 4 July 2011, Curaçao, p.8. 
Also Investiture speech of Karel Frielink, president of the Bar Curaçao of 21 September 2012 (Rede mr 
Karel Frielink Deken van de Orde van Advocaten Curaçao gehouden op vrijdag 21 september 2012 ter 
gelegenheid van de installatie van een drietal rechters bij het Gemeenschappelijk Hof van Justitie van 
Aruba, Curaçao, Sint Maarten en van Bonaire, St. Eustatius en Saba). 
207
 Wit 2011.  
208
 Country ordinance Council of State, Article 28. 
209
 Constitution, Article 60. 
210
 Rules of Procedure, Article 32. Cf. Article 52. 
211
 Constitution, Articles 41, 42 and 43. Cf. also Article 53. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
45 
CURAÇAO 
 

Consultative referenda are not used often, but have been held three times to consult the people of 
219
Curaçao on choices in constitutional relations, lastly in 2009. Other than that, however, according 
to the experts interviewed, members of Parliament are not actively engaging in public consultation 
220
on relevant issues. Parliament and members of Parliament are also not considered to actively 
support public oversight, and do not, for example, regularly publish reports about its or their 
activities. However, the recently improved website, although its content still needs to be expanded, 
does now allow the public to better hold Parliament accountable. (Also refer to the section on 
Transparency.) 
In recent years, members of Parliament have not been prosecuted for abusing their powers or for 
other criminal offences while in office. As for parliamentary immunity, experts interviewed showed 
some concern that the (limited) immunity granted is too often used to avoid members of Parliament 
being held accountable. For some members of Parliament, a legal expert noted, ‘[t]he parliamentary 
immunity enjoyed by members of Parliament appears to be an excuse to say whatever they like in 
221
Parliament’. As noted, Parliament itself included disciplinary actions in its Rules of Procedure. In 
practice, the former president of Parliament and his substitute have used or have threatened to use 
these powers several times, but whether or not this was done to hold individual members of 
Parliament accountable, was subject to debate. The former president himself described the use of 
his powers as legitimate use of an ‘escalation model’; a member of Parliament thus removed 
222
described it as ‘dictatorial’.  
 
Integrity Mechanisms (law) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE MECHANISMS IN PLACE TO ENSURE THE INTEGRITY OF MEMBERS OF THE 
LEGISLATURE? 
 
 
There are some provisions to ensure the integrity of members of Parliament, such as the 
constitutional safeguards to prevent conflicting positions within the public service and some 
penal provisions to criminalise bribery. However, important provisions such as those related 
to gifts, assets, additional functions and lobbying contacts are not or are no longer in place.  
Before accepting office, members of Parliament are constitutionally required to swear an oath or 
solemnly affirm in the presence of the governor that they have not given or promised anything 
related to their election and will not do so, and will not be bought (‘oath of purity’ – zuiveringseed). 
The oath also includes the positive obligation to abide by the Constitution and to promote the 
223
welfare of Curaçao to the best of one’s ability (‘oath of office’ – ambtseed). This is also reflected in 
224
the Constitutional requirement of Parliament to represent ‘the entire people of Curaçao’. 
 
219
 Referenda were held in 1993, 2005 and 2009. 
220
 See, for example, Askhon Dushi Kòrsou, 17 January 2012, Letter to the president of the Parliament of 
Curaçao, and ‘Parliament stages show’ (Parlement voert een show op), 8 March 2012, via 
www.versgeperst.com [accessed 15 April 2013]. 
221
 Speech by Karel Frielink LL.M. president of the Curaçao Bar Association on the occasion of the 
installation of four judges at the Joint Court of Justice of Aruba, Curaçao, St Maarten, and of Bonaire, St 
Eustatius, and Saba on Friday 23 September 2011. 
222
 See ‘Asjes has Godett removed’ (Asjes laat Godett verwijderen), 5 November 2010 via www.rnw.nl 
[accessed 15 April 2013]. 
223
 Charter of the Kingdom, Article 47 and Constitution, Article 49. The oath is similar to that of, for 
example, ministers, but differed somewhat from the oath of, for example, the Ombudsman. Compare 
Constitution Article 36 and Country ordinance Ombudsman Article 8.  
224
 Constitution, Article 39. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
47 
CURAÇAO 
 

Integrity mechanisms (practice) 
Score: 25 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE INTEGRITY OF LEGISLATORS ENSURED IN PRACTICE? 
 
Because of a lack of sufficient integrity rules and the lack of transparency in practice, it 
cannot be established whether the integrity of members of Parliament is ensured in practice.  
Given that there is no legal requirement to do so, Parliament does not maintain registers of gifts and 
hospitality disclosures nor registers of assets and interests declarations. There is also no public 
register of additional functions and additional sources of income of members of Parliament, and the 
information related to public positions annexed to the credentials is not required to be made 
233
public. Official missions are mostly approved by the Central Committee as required, but, 
according to one expert interviewed, this is not always the case, and depends on the individual 
president who is to sign off for approval. There is no public record of official missions. 
There have been some instances to suggest other interests than the public interest are at stake. 
Thus, for example, as mentioned above, the governor of the Netherlands Antilles considered the 
decision-making processes of the Island Council, when all but one of its members approved their 
own pension regulation, to be in conflict with the principle of good governance. That would have 
required the members of the Council to tread with extra caution to avoid any perception that their 
personal interests would influence their decisions, whereas in practice the governor noted the 
234
decision was ‘prepared without care’ and with an ‘exceptional hastiness’. 
Also, as one expert interviewed pointed out, the pressure on individual members of Parliament can 
be great. As mentioned, there is no record of individual members of Parliament prosecuted or 
convicted for abuses of office in recent years. However, in 2012 several members of Parliament 
made accusations of attempted bribes in different media. These members of Parliament were all 
reportedly approached to withdraw their support for the then ruling government or, in one case, the 
235
coalition in the making. As far as could be established, in none of those instances did members of 
Parliament actually officially report the attempt, but in at least one case the Public Prosecutor’s 
Office investigated further on its own initiative. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
233
 Cf. Rules of Procedure, Article 4. 
234
 Decree of the Governor of the Netherlands Antilles of 5 October 2010 to annul the Island ordinance to 
change the pension regulation of members of the Island Council Curaçao. 
235
 See, for example, ‘Investigation into bribery members of Parliament’ (Onderzoek naar omkoping 
Statenleden), 31 July 2012, via www.kkcuracao.com [accessed 10 April 2013]; ‘Cordoba (PS) was offered 
two million’ (Cordoba (PS) is 2 miljoen aangeboden), Antilliaans Dagblad, 28 November 2012. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
49 
CURAÇAO 
 

access to government information. The recent ordinance on health care cost insurance requires 
244
government to do so within three years.  
Also, to support Parliament in its Executive oversight, High Councils of State such as the Court of 
Audit and the Ombudsman are required to report to Parliament, and Parliament may request them to 
provide further information to, or in, Parliament. Parliament may also request the Court of Audit to 
investigate. Parliament appoints the Ombudsman, and plays a role in the appointment process of 
the members of the Court of Audit. Similarly, the Kingdom Acts on the Law Enforcement Council and 
the Board of Financial Supervision contain provisions to provide Parliament with reports and advice. 
(For more information, see Chapters VII.5 Law Enforcement Agencies, VII.7 Ombudsman and VII.8 
Supreme Audit and Supervisory Institutions (Public Sector)) Moreover, Parliament can always use 
its right of initiative and its right of amendment to legally require the Executive to provide specific 
245
information.  
Overall, then, the powers granted to Parliament are considered to be many. However, there are 
doubts regarding the ability of Parliament to effectively apply its broad powers in the area of 
executive oversight in practice, and to monitor its progress in the execution of legislation adopted 
and policy plans formulated. Those interviewed in the course of the assessment labelled 
Parliament’s performance in practice as ‘weak’ and ‘too dependent on the Executive’. Parliament is 
said to be ‘not functioning well’ and too often acting as ‘a rubber stamp’, also in relation to the 
budget process. This lack of independence combined with the above-noted weak accountability 
mechanisms renders Parliament’s oversight of the Executive vulnerable. 
Although ministers are sometimes summoned to Parliament to provide information, one expert 
interviewed doubted whether Parliament in practice make sufficient use of its rights to hold the 
Executive accountable when the quality of the information provided is insufficient. Also, agenda 
items put up for discussion by the opposition are reported to not always receive the same attention 
and same prompt processing as items listed by members supporting the coalition.  
In addition, effective oversight in practice is hampered in those instances where public companies, 
public foundations and other public entities are concerned. This was illustrated on more than one 
occasion when board members, in line with the view of the Executive which strongly felt public 
companies were not to talk to Parliament on their own, did not show when Parliament required them 
246
to attend a meeting. Also, although Parliament does regularly vote or suggest the setting up of a 
commission of inquiry, such as on the functioning of the Security Service Curaçao or the judicial 
chain, so far no such commission has actually been installed in Curaçao in practice since October 
247
2010. In the history of the Netherlands Antilles, the instrument was also not often used. 
Moreover, supportive information of advisory or supervisory bodies is not used, or not used in a 
timely manner. For example, reports of the Court of Audit do not generate much interest in 
Parliament, although the Court of Audit does detect a turn for the better. Parliament has not yet, 
248
however, called a minister to account following a report of the Court of Audit. Annual reports and 
individual reports and decisions of the Ombudsman are also not discussed in parliamentary 
sessions. (Also refer to Chapter VII.7 Ombudsman and Chapter VII.8 Supreme Audit and 
Supervisory Institutions (Public Sector)).  
 
244
 Country ordinance on public access to government information, Article 15. Country ordinance Health 
care insurance (Landsverordening Basisverzekering ziektekosten), Country Gazette 2013, No.3, Article 
10.7. 
245
 Cf. Constitution, Articles 77 and 78. 
246
 See, for example, ‘Director Curoil not in Parliament’ (Directeur Curoil niet naar Staten), 9 June 2012, 
via knipselkrantcuracao.wordpress.com; ‘Supervisory board Aqualectra not in Parliament’ (RvC 
Aqualectra niet in de Staten), 27 September 2011, via www.versgeperst.com [accessed 22 May 2013]. 
247
 Country ordinance Inquiry regulation, general part of the explanatory memorandum. 
248
 Cft, Report of findings. PEFA-assessment financial management Curaçao (Rapport van bevindingen. 
PEFA inventarisatie financieel beheer) (Curaçao, Cft: February 2013), punt 28c. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
51 
CURAÇAO 
 

254
code and provisions related to the appointment of an advisor on corporate governance. Also, and 
prior to October 2010, the Island Council approved legislation to protect the integrity of the Minister 
to regulate the legal and material rights and obligations of civil servants, including those of 
Parliament’s Administration, to regulate the finances of political groups and to revoke membership of 
Parliament in case of an irrevocable conviction.  
Some of these ordinances already existed in similar form in the Netherlands Antilles. However, 
several changes were made to strengthen the legal framework. Thus, for example, the ordinance 
regulating the rights and duties of civil servants now incorporates a provision which requires 
ministries to appoint a confidant for integrity issues, to advise civil servants confidentially how to deal 
with knowledge of possible breaches of integrity in the organisation. It also introduces the 
requirement to actively register additional functions. (This is discussed in more detail in Chapter 
VII.4 Public Sector). Other legislation is new, most notably the legislation on the financing of political 
parties, legislation that was conceived for many years. The ordinance is an important provision to 
govern financial oversight of political parties, although it does currently contain several loopholes 
which limit its effectiveness. (Also refer to Chapter VII.10 Political Parties.)  
On the negative side, however, monitoring the implementation of and compliance with the new laws 
enacted has not been prioritised by Parliament, and many of the aforementioned legislative 
provisions are yet to be put into practice. (Also refer to Chapter VII.2 Executive.)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
254
 Island ordinance Corporate governance (Eilandsverordening Corporate governance), Official Curaçao 
Gazette 2009, No.92; Island decree Code corporate governance Curaçao (Eilandsbesluit Code corporate 
governance Curaçao), Official Curaçao Gazette, 2009, No.96.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
53 
CURAÇAO 
 

267
the Council of Ministers is mandatory – decision-making power remains with the individual 
minister concerned.  
Politically, the governor is shielded by the Constitution. At the country level, apart from his/her role in 
the process of government formation, he/she does not have a political responsibility of his/her own. 
Although the governor is required to sign country ordinances and country decrees, the counter-
signature of one or more individual ministers means they, and not the governor, are politically 
268
responsible for the governor’s acts as head of government. The assessment in this chapter 
therefore focuses on the Council of Ministers and its individual ministers as ‘the Executive’, and only 
addresses the governor where it is thought relevant to refer to his/her capacity as representative of 
the Kingdom government. Also, the public sector as a whole, including the ministries, is assessed in 
Chapter VII.4 Public Sector, and only relevant in this chapter in so far as the management of those 
ministries by the different ministers is concerned. 
 
ASSESSMENT 
 
Capacity 
 
Resources (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DOES THE EXECUTIVE HAVE ADEQUATE RESOURCES TO EFFECTIVELY CARRY OUT ITS 
DUTIES? 
 
The Executive appears to receive adequate funds to effectively carry out its duties, but there 
is a potential weakness in the selection of ministers themselves. The aftermath of the 
reorganisation of the civil service is also likely to negatively affect the Executive’s 
effectiveness. 
As part of its programme to structurally improve its public finances, the Executive is attempting to 
reduce its expenditure. Nevertheless, this assessment did not return any indications that the 
resources available to the Executive are not adequate to enable it to effectively carry out its duties, 
although according to one expert there are some indications that more specialised knowledge to 
support the Executive could be of use, and fulfilling specialised functions sufficiently is not always 
possible. Also, so far, the Executive has roughly complied with the freeze on vacancies imposed on 
all ministries since July 2012. The freeze only makes exceptions for so-called ‘critical functions’, 
269
allowing the Executive to sufficiently safeguard its services. 
Several experts interviewed mentioned the quality of ministers themselves as one of the key 
resources to allow the Executive to function effectively, and potentially one of its key weaknesses. 
Although there appears to be an increased awareness among political parties that effective use of 
executive power requires other qualities than effective use of parliamentary power, this is not yet 
consistently reflected in all appointment processes. Thus, appointing those with the necessary skills 
 
267
 Ibid., Article 5. 
268
 Constitution, Article 34. 
269
 ‘Freeze on vacancies at ministries’ (Vacaturestop bij ministeries), 9 July 2012, via 
www.versgeperst.com [accessed 5 June 2013]. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
55 
CURAÇAO 
 

276
competent to adopt other regulations, that is, country and ministerial decrees. They may also 
issue administrative decisions and orders.  
277
Ministers are accountable to Parliament, and require its confidence to execute their powers. In 
that sense, they are not independent. However, in executing their tasks, ministers are to act 
independently. To underscore this and prevent conflicts of interests, the Constitution declares 
several other functions incompatible with that of a minister, such as that of the (substitute) governor 
or the minister plenipotentiary, member of one of the High Councils of State, and of a public official. 
This also implies a minister may not simultaneously be a member of Parliament, although there is a 
provision which allows a minister to combine his/her function with that of member of Parliament for, 
278
at most, three months after admission to Parliament.  
In addition, because of the small size of the Curaçao community and to prevent overly tight personal 
279
ties within the Council of Ministers, the Constitution rules out blood relations between ministers, 
280
although not other family ties. The independence of the ministers is further safeguarded because 
the governor, in his/her capacity representing the head of government, may attend meetings of the 
281
Council of Ministers, but only has consultative powers. Also, in view of the separation of powers, 
the Constitution rules that the Council of Ministers is to determine its own rules of procedures 
282
independently. 
There are no provisions regulating lobbying activities.  
 
Independence (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE EXECUTIVE INDEPENDENT IN PRACTICE? 
 
There are some concerns of undue influence of political parties on the decisions and 
activities of the Executive, also related to party financing. The Executive is also approached 
by lobbyists, but it cannot be determined to what extent this affects its independence. 
The assessment did not return clear examples of undue influence on the Executive from Parliament 
in practice. There were also no examples provided of undue influence of the judiciary on the 
Executive. (Also refer to Chapter VII.1 Legislature and Chapter VII.3 Judiciary.)  
However, there are some concerns related to the significant impact of political parties on the 
functioning of both Parliament and the Executive, blurring the constitutionally prescribed division of 
powers. As one expert indicated, political interventions at all stages leave little room for manoeuvre 
for the Executive in its decision-making processes. This was illustrated, for example, when in 2011 
two ministers of Curaçao’s first government took opposite standpoints with regard to a data centre to 
283
be established in Curaçao. This was later attributed to ‘miscommunication’. To better protect the 
unity of government policy, not the government but the political leaders of the coalition partners – 
two of which were ministers, one a member of Parliament – promised to place more emphasis on 
the communication between themselves, between the chairmen of the political groups in Parliament 
 
276
 Constitution, Articles 74 and 83.  
277
 Ibid., Articles 28 and 29 and the explanatory memorandum to those articles. 
278
 Ibid., Article 30 and the explanatory memorandum to that article. Also refer to Article 38. 
279
 The official term is consanquinity to the second degree. 
280
 Ibid., Article 31. 
281
 Ibid., Article 33. Also refer to Rules of Procedure, Article 2. 
282
 Constitution, Article 33 and the explanatory memorandum to that article. 
283
 ‘Miscommunication within coalition’ (Miscommunicatie in coalitie), 2 July 2011, via 
www.versgeperst.com [accessed 16 May 2013]. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
57 
CURAÇAO 
 

administrative matters, that is, all matters of relevance to the policies of an administrative authority, 
290
including the preparation and implementation of such policies.  
More specifically, the right of access to legislation is provided for to the degree that the minister of 
general affairs is to publish legislative acts in either the Country Gazette or the Official Curaçao 
Gazette. This includes all country ordinances as well as all country and ministerial decrees. The 
minister of general affairs is also required to publish several – but not all – administrative decisions, 
that is, those legally required to be published in one of the two gazettes, for example, some 
decisions related to building permits, dispossession, or the appointment of officials entrusted with 
291
supervisory and detection powers.  
Moreover, as mentioned in the previous chapter, to enhance transparency of the legislative process, 
the minister of general affairs is also required to make public all draft ordinances when submitting 
those ordinances for approval to Parliament, together with the Council of State’s advice and 
292
government’s reply to that advice. Transparency provisions are even more explicit with respect to 
the government budget. Thus, for example, because the budget process is ‘crucial for a proper 
operation of the parliamentary democracy’, all draft budgets, draft budget amendments and draft 
annual accounts are to be published ‘immediately’ after their submission to Parliament. Publishing 
293
on the internet is optional and suggested in the explanatory memorandum, but not required. 
Government is also required to publish its personnel decisions as well as an overview of Curaçao’s 
294
finances on a monthly basis in local newspapers.  
On the negative side, however, although ‘all documents to be provided to Parliament are, in 
295
principle, public’ and several experts confirmed that indeed this is also commonly understood to 
be the case, there is no solid legal provision to safeguard this and require the Executive to publish 
its (non-confidential) information proactively. And although a central register of all legislation may be 
296
established, this is not mandatory. Similarly, there are no provisions requiring the government to 
maintain a public central register of all administrative decisions. There are no provisions requiring 
publication on the internet. Also, the country ordinance on administrative law does not contain any 
explicit provisions related to notification, communication and public preparatory procedures, 
297
although some individual ordinances do contain such provisions. Moreover, the law does not 
require ministers to publicly disclose income, assets, gifts, business or personal interests, nor 
additional functions or activities. Ministers are also not required to publicly report on official missions. 
(Also refer to the section on Integrity, below.) 
Deliberations in the meetings of the Council of Ministers are to take place behind closed doors, and 
there are no specific regulations to ensure that the content of sessions of the Council of Ministers is 
298
accessible to the public. All that passes within chambers is to remain confidential, unless the 
Council decides otherwise or in as far the execution of the decisions requires the information to be 
299 300
made public. However, the Council is required to publish its rules of procedure.  
 
290
 Ibid., Article 8. 
291
 Proclamation ordinance (Bekendmakingsverordening), Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, No.87, 
Appendix i, Article 5. 
292
 Country ordinance Council of State, Article 27. Also refer to the country ordinance on public access to 
government information, Article 10.  
293
 Country ordinance Government accounts 2010 (Landsverordening Comptabliteit 2010), Official 
Curaçao Gazette 2010, No.87, Appendix b, Article 8 and the explanatory memorandum, general part I.3. 
294
 Island ordinance containing rules regarding the requirement of the Island Executive to periodically 
publish policy information (Eilandsverordening houdende regels inzake de verplichting van het 
Bestuurscollege tot periodieke publikatie van beleidsinformatie), Official Curaçao Gazette, 1998, No.4, 
Articles 1 and 2. Also refer to Offical Curaçao Gazette, 1998, No.82. 
295
 Country ordinance Government accounts 2010, explanatory memorandum to Article 8. 
296
 Proclamation ordinance, Article 12. 
297
 Compare the Dutch General administrative law Act (Algemene wet bestuursrecht), for example, 
Division 3.4 and Division 3.6. 
298
 Rules of Procedure, Article 10. 
299
 Ibid., Article 19 and the explanatory memorandum of that article. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
59 
CURAÇAO 
 

304
Overheidsaccountantsbureau) are not made public. Also, information required to be published on 
personnel and finance developments is published neither consistently nor completely. As a result, it 
is not always transparent what legislation applies, what legislative and administrative powers are 
305
delegated to whom, nor how the Executive uses its powers granted. This also implies it is not 
transparent whether or not the Executive, when taking administrative decisions, commits to the 
general principles of proper administration (algemene beginselen van behoorlijk bestuur). 
On the positive side, it has become customary for the prime minister to inform the press on a weekly 
basis, or as often as deemed necessary, after meetings of the Council of Ministers, and to be 
306
interviewed for radio and television. Those decisions which by their nature are to be made public 
are reported to be published on the government’s website , although, as noted above, this is 
currently difficult to verify. When asked, further information about the meetings is reported to be 
provided by the Secretariat of the Council of Ministers. Also, although the Executive is not required 
307
to publicly report on official missions, in some instances it does.  
 
Accountability (law) 
Score: 100 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE PROVISIONS IN PLACE TO ENSURE THAT MEMBERS OF THE EXECUTIVE HAVE TO 
REPORT AND BE ANSWERABLE FOR THEIR ACTIONS? 
 
 
There are many provisions in place to ensure that ministers can be held accountable 
politically, both at the country as well as the Kingdom level. Ministers can also be held 
accountable in civil and criminal proceedings.  
Ministers are first and foremost accountable (‘responsible’) to Parliament. A minister who no longer 
308
has the confidence of Parliament is to step down (‘the rule of confidence’). To enable Parliament 
and the Executive to apply this rule in practice, as mentioned in the previous chapter, ministers are 
required to respond to questions and to appear before Parliament if summoned. There are a number 
of additional provisions which require the Executive actively to report to Parliament. Thus, for 
example, each year, at the beginning of the parliamentary year, Parliament is to be informed of the 
309
government’s proposed policy, and government is to hand in a balanced budget. In the course of 
the year and after the year’s closing, government is also required to account for the revenues and 
expenditures of the country, and to provide Parliament with an annual account, examined by the 
administration’s own internal auditor as well as the Court of Audit (ARC – Algemene Rekenkamer 
Curaçao). This account must also include a recounting to what extent the policy proposals 
310
formulated have been realised. Similar duties for the Executive to report back to Parliament are 
included, for example, in the recently adopted health care ordinance, the ordinance on reporting 
 
304
 Cft, February 2013. Report of findings. PEFA-assessment financial management Curaçao (Rapport 
van bevindingen. PEFA-inventarisatie financieel beheer Curaçao), p.5. 
305
 See, for example, Arjen van Rijn, ‘In search of the Constitition’ (Speurtocht naar de nieuwe 
staatsregeling), Amigoe, 28 February 2011. 
306
 Rules of Procedure, explanatory memorandum to Article 3. 
307
 See, for example,14 March 2012, General report on account of visit to the Netherlands by Prime 
Minister Hodge (Algemeen verslag naar aanleiding van bezoek Nederland premier Hodge), via 
www.parlamento.cw [accessed 16 May 2013].  
308
 Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Article 2; Constitution, Articles 28 and 29 and the 
explanatory memorandum to Article 29. Also see Rogier, 2012:127. 
309
 Constitution, Articles 54 and 85. 
310
 Ibid., Article 85. Country ordinance Government Accounts, Articles 33, 50 and 51. Also refer to Article 
42 and the Kingdom Act Financial Supervision Curaçao and Sint Maarten, Article 18. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
61 
CURAÇAO 
 

liable in criminal and civil proceedings. In the former case, ministers may, for example, be 
prosecuted for abuses of office. Specifically, ministers who countersign legislation knowing it 
violates higher-order law or any other legislation in force in Curaçao, or who intentionally fail to 
implement legal provisions in as far implementing those provisions is their responsibility, may be 
322
imprisoned or fined. (Also refer to the section on Integrity.) In the latter case, in case of unlawful 
acts, this requires among other things that the violated standard of behaviour must intend to offer 
323
protection against damage suffered. As of 1 January 2012, a civil inquiry procedure to request an 
investigation into the policy and affairs within legal persons, such as public companies, may also 
324
serve to hold ministers – in their capacity as representatives of the shareholder – accountable.  
If a minister is suspected of an abuse of office, the authorities of the public prosecutor are executed 
325
by the procurator general or someone appointed by him/her. In some specified cases, the right to 
326
public office or the right to vote and be elected can be revoked.  
Also, both the governor – in his/her capacity as Kingdom organ – as well as the Board of Financial 
Supervision and the Law Enforcement Council – in their capacity as advisors to the Kingdom 
Council of Ministers – may find reason to bring matters to the attention of the Kingdom Council of 
Ministers. In some specified cases, the Kingdom Council of Ministers may decide to instruct the 
Executive, for example, to adjust its budget to comply with the Kingdom Act of Financial 
327
Supervision. If the problem cannot be redressed within the country, as an ultimum remedium, the 
Kingdom government may act and can suspend or annul legislation that conflicts with higher-order 
328
law. In addition, as noted earlier, there is some possibility for constitutional review at the country 
329
level. (Also refer to Chapter VII.1 Legislature.)  
 
Accountability (practice) 
Score: 25 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THERE EFFECTIVE OVERSIGHT OF EXECUTIVE ACTIVITIES IN PRACTICE? 
 
The accountability provisions in place are not very effective, primarily because Parliament is 
largely inactive in questioning the activities and policies of the Executive. Civil and criminal 
proceedings are rare, although there now is increased attention towards these proceedings. 
The Executive submits information to Parliament and participates in its sessions. However, several 
experts noted that there does not appear to be a strong conviction among ministers that being a 
minister implies being accountable to Parliament, not only when summoned by or to Parliament, but 
also proactively. For one, questions of members of Parliament are not always answered, and 
sometimes only after a considerable length of time. In addition, important information about the 
 
322
 Penal Code, Book 2, for example, Article 2:344. Also refer to Article 2:345. 
323
 Civil Code, Book 6, Articles 162 and 163. 
324
 Ibid., Book 2, Article 271. 
325
 Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 476. 
326
 Penal Code, Book 1, Articles 1:64 and 1:65. Also see, for example, Penal Code, Book 2, Article 2:364. 
327
 Kingdom Act Financial Supervision Curacao and Sint Maarten, Article 13, also refer to, for example, 
Articles 12, 14 and 17. Kingdom Act on the Law Enforcement Council, Article 32. These Acts are based 
on Article 38 of the Charter for the Kingdom, based on consensus. 
328
 Charter for the Kingdom, Articles 43 and 50. For a description of the process envisioned with 
safeguarding the interests mentioned, see The Kingdom’s role of safeguarding. The safeguarding of rights 
and freedoms, legal certainty and good governance in the Kingdom of the Netherlands. (Waarborgfunctie 
Koninkrijk. Het waarborgen van rechten en vrijheden, rechtszekerheid en deugdelijk bestuur in het 
Koninkrijk der Nederlanden), 15 July 2011. 
329
 Constitution, Article 101. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
63 
CURAÇAO 
 

339
have ‘preventative significance’. However, in 2012 the Council of Ministers of the Kingdom did 
issue an instruction to the Executive on the advice of the Board of Financial Supervision. The 
Executive followed the instruction, at least to an extent and only after a legal procedure which led to 
some amendments, and prepared several policy measures to satisfy the relevant budgetary 
340
norms. (Also refer to Chapter VII.8 Supreme Audit and Supervisory Institutions (Public Sector)). 
Civil and criminal proceedings against ministers are very rare in practice, although in September 
2012, the Public Prosecutor’s Office reported that, over the last few months it had been confronted 
341
with ‘politically related’ charges. There have also been several suggestions of a former minister of 
finance being a suspect in an on-going criminal investigation, the ‘Bientu-investigation’, but this has 
342
never been officially confirmed. (Also refer to Chapter VII.5 Law Enforcement Agencies.) 
However, as far as could be established, there have been no rulings in a civil proceeding convicting 
a minister of an unlawful act. There have been a few criminal cases, some of which led to 
 
convictions, but those were several years ago. Nevertheless, the issue is topical and in January 
2013 Parliament passed a motion to request the Council of State’s opinion on possibilities to hold 
343
members of the Executive personally liable. This investigation is on-going. Also, in February 2013, 
the Public Prosecutor’s Office announced it would request the start of a civil inquiry into the 
decision-making policies of several public companies (Integrated Utility Holding NV (Aqualectra), 
Curaçao Oil (Curoil) NV, Curoil Gas NV and Refineria di Kòrsou NV). According to the Public 
Prosecutor’s Office, the investigation is to include the use of authorities of the shareholder as well as 
that of several members of the supervisory board. The Court schedules to rule on the request in July 
344
2013.  
 
Integrity mechanisms (law) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE MECHANISMS IN PLACE TO ENSURE THE INTEGRITY OF MEMBERS OF THE 
EXECUTIVE? 
 
There are several strict provisions in place to ensure the integrity of members of the 
Executive. However, monitoring compliance is not sufficiently provided for. The Executive is 
not required to monitor gifts. Existing whistleblower provisions are insufficient.  
345
The general integrity rules for civil servants do not apply to ministers. However, in October 2012, 
346
after severe criticism of the screening process of the ministers of Curaçao’s first government and 
347
prior to the elections, new and stricter legislation was introduced to replace earlier regulations in 
place to ensure the integrity of members of the Executive. The current legislation covers the 
screening phase as well as the period in office, and also contains some provisions related to the 
 
339
 See also ‘Intervention won’t happen’ (‘Ingrijpen gebeurt nooit’), 5 June 2013, Antilliaans Dagblad.  
340
 See, for example, Budget 2013. 
341
 Public Prosecutor, Press Notice of 17 September 2012, The Public Prosecutor and politically-related 
charges (Het Openbaar Ministerie en politiek getinte aangiftes).  
342
 ‘Jamaloodin officially charged in Bientu case’ (Jamaloodin officieel verdachte Bientu-zaak), 1 
November 2012, via www.versgeperst.com. 
343
 ‘Rosaria happy with passed motion’ (Rosaria blij met aangenomen motie), 21 January 2013, via 
www.versgeperst.com. The motion itself was not found on Parliament’s website. 
344
 Public prosecutor Curaçao supports FAS request, 14 February 2013, via www.amigoe.com [accessed 
4 May 2013]. 
345
 Cf. country ordinance Legal and material rights of civil servants (Landsverordening Materieel 
ambtenarenrecht), Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, No.87, Appendix v, Article 2. 
346
 See on this, for example, Commissie onderzoek Curaçao, Do it yourselves [Doe het zelf] (S.l.: 
Commissie onderzoek Curaçao: 30 September 2011); prime minister’s address to Parliament, 11 October 
2011. 
347
 On these earlier regulations, also see below, under Integrity mechanisms (practice). 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
65 
CURAÇAO 
 

360
the democratic rule of law and the integrity of the public administration. In view of Curaçao’s small 
scale and the sometimes blurred divide between the Executive and its administration, this too can 
361
be considered an important loophole. (Also refer to the section on Public sector management, 
below.) Also, although some 10 years ago an internal regulation requiring all gifts to be centrally 
registered was developed and successfully implemented, this regulation is no longer effective. 
According to an expert interviewed, successive cabinets did not comply with the regulation, and 
there is no system in place to effectively monitor compliance and enforce the rules. Thus, at the 
moment, there is no explicit requirement to register gifts, financial or otherwise, received while in 
office.  
362
Indeed, according to some experts, the current legislation is in fact too strict. Thus, for example, it 
not only rules out recommending for office a suspect in an on-going criminal investigation, but it also 
rules out recommending anyone – presumably ever – convicted for a criminal offence, without 
363
further qualifying this. Also, if a minister – that is, in office – is regarded as a suspect in an on-
going criminal investigation, he/she is required to hand in his/her resignation immediately. There are 
364
no provisions for suspension.  
Ministers are, as mentioned, not immune from prosecution and may be sentenced for abuses of 
365
office. This includes prosecution for bribery and extortion. They may also be prosecuted for other 
366
offences, such as making public confidential information or withholding government property. And 
ministers, as all appointed to the public service, are to report abuses of office and other related 
crimes of which they have become aware while carrying out their official duties, with a few 
367
exceptions, such as those related to the risk of incriminating themselves. However, there are no 
368
comprehensive general provisions to protect whistleblowers and the few provisions incorporated 
in the general civil servants regulations are presumably not effective in addressing integrity 
breaches of the Executive. This is because the procedure includes notification of a suspected 
369
integrity breach to a minister, who is then also responsible for further processing the report. (Also 
refer to Chapter VII.4 Public Sector.)  
 
Integrity mechanisms (practice) 
 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE INTEGRITY OF MEMBERS OF THE EXECUTIVE ENSURED IN PRACTICE? 
 
The current screening process still contains some vulnerabilities, and its effectiveness in 
practice cannot be assessed because of a lack of effective oversight.  
The integrity regulations mentioned above were only adopted some months ago, that is, in October 
2012. There is no information available to assess whether or not they are applied effectively in 
 
360
 Ibid., Article 4 and the explanatory memorandum.  
361
 Also refer to Council of Advice, RvA no. RA/10-12-LV, 6 August 2012, p.4-5. 
362
 Also Speech 75th Anniversary of Parliament, Curaçao 4 April 2013, Jacob (Bob) Wit, Towards a 
constitutional democracy (Naar een constitutionele democratie). 
363
 Country ordinance Integrity (candidate) ministers, Article 7. Compare with Constitution, Articles 30 and 
43. 
364
 Country ordinance Integrity (candidate) ministers, Article 16.  
365
 Penal Code, Book 2, Title XXVIII. 
366
 Penal Code, Book 3, Title VIII. 
367
 Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 200.  
368
 Civil Code, Book 7A, Article 1614y. Also Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 261. 
369
 Country ordinance Legal and material rights and obligations of civil servants, Sections 15 and 16 and 
the explanatory memorandum. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
67 
CURAÇAO 
 

Role 
 
Public sector management 
 
Score: 25 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTED TO AND ENGAGED IN DEVELOPING A WELL-GOVERNED PUBLIC 
SECTOR? 
 
A structural commitment to a well-developed public sector is lacking, although there are 
some positive developments, such as the introduction of the corporate governance advisor 
and several specified inquiries commissioned by the Executive.  
Curaçao’s governments repeatedly emphasised the importance of a well-governed public sector. 
Thus, for example, both in the budget for 2012 as well as in the budget for 2013, government 
emphasised the importance of a continuous development of the civil service, focusing on concepts 
379
of integrity, empowerment and accountability. They also underscored the importance of good 
380
corporate governance of public companies and public foundations.  
In practice, the specific circumstances of the new constitutional relations, requiring two executive 
layers – one of the former Netherlands Antilles and one of the former island territory of Curaçao – to 
merge, provided for a challenging start for the Curaçao Executive. That it would not be easy had 
already been foreseen in the run-up to the new country, when the plans to form the required ‘New 
Administrative Organisation’ (Nieuwe Bestuurlijke Organisatie) were labelled as ambitious, perhaps 
381
‘too ambitious’. In the nine ministries, almost everyone was assigned a new position, a new 
function, and had to work with new procedures. Approximately a quarter of all civil servants, more 
than 1,000 people, objected formally. It took until well into 2011 to handle all complaints, and left 
many with low morale and the feeling that positions in the new organisation had been assigned 
382
indiscriminately.  
The lack of continuity at the Executive and top administrative level did not ease the task at hand. 
Since October 2010, a total of six ministers have been in charge of the Ministry of Administration, 
Planning and Service (BPD), the ministry responsible for the effective functioning of the civil service 
383
as a whole. At the same time, and in line with tradition, the administrative leadership also 
underwent significant changes. And although the Executive denied that appointments and 
384
dismissals were politically driven, many continue to think otherwise and argued that some 
385
appointments were not necessarily in line with the required level of professionalism. Similar 
perceptions continue to persist around appointment and dismissal procedures of board members of 
public companies and foundations. These were fuelled by decisions of the Executive, both in 2010 
and in 2012, to try to bring about collective dismissal of acting board members. Despite the 
introduction of a corporate governance ordinance, a corporate governance code and a corporate 
governance advisor, the prevailing opinion is that the composition of board members of public 
 
379
 See Budget 2012, Country Gazette 2012, No.3, ‘Care for staff policy’ (Zorg voor het personeelsbeleid) 
and Budget 2013 ‘Care for human resource and organisation policy’ (Zorg voor het human resource – and 
organisatiebeleid). 
380
 See Budget 2012 and Budget 2013, ‘Corporate governance code’.  
381
 Commission of experts, Assessment of government apparatus Curaçao and Sint Maarten (Toetsing 
overheidsapparaten Curaçao en Sint Maarten) (s.l.: Commission of experts, May 2010), p.40.  
382
 Alex Mollen, Lots of ambition, little time. (Zoveel ambitie, zo weinig tijd). In: Hardy A. Huisden & Brede 
Kristensen (Eds), A new country Curaçao (Een nieuw land Curacao) (Curaçao: Carib Publishing, 2012), 
pp.15-33. 
383
 Four ministers in the first cabinet, one in the interim and one minister since the Cabinet-Hodge. 
384
 Prime minister’s address to Parliament, 11 October 2011:33.  
385
 Also refer to, for example, ‘VBC criticises appointment policy Schotte’ (VBC hekelt benoemingenbeleid 
Schotte), 14 May 2011, via www.rnw.nl [accessed 5 June 2013]. For a more recent example, ‘Directors 
themselves responsible’ (Top SOAW zelf verantwoordelijk), 15 May 2013, Antilliaans Dagblad.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
69 
CURAÇAO 
 

However, some important legislation is still pending. Thus, for example, although it is reported that 
the draft harmonisation of supervision ordinances of the financial sector is now ‘in the legislative 
392 393
process’, it has not yet been enacted, and the same is true for anti-trust legislation. Also, 
several legislative provisions that have been introduced have not yet been fully applied in practice, 
such as those incorporated in the ordinance on the financial affairs of political parties. In addition, 
progress in the execution of action plans, agreed upon in collaboration between the Kingdom 
partners prior to the constitutional changes to safeguard the proper execution of tasks of the Police 
394
Force Curaçao (KPC – Korps Politie Curaçao) and the prison, is slow. (Also refer to Chapter VII.5 
Law Enforcement).  
The Executive has acted on the process of review and determination of necessary amendments of 
legislation in view of compliance with the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force 
(FATF) with regard to anti-money-laundering and the combating of the financing of terrorism 
(AML/CFT). However, up to now, many of the recommendations have yet to be implemented and 
395
several pieces of legislation are, also, reported to be ‘in revision’ or ‘in the legislative process’. So 
far, also, the Executive has not developed a supervisory programme to ensure compliance of the 
396
non-profit organisations with the AML/CFT legal framework. (Also refer to Chapter VII.14 
Supervisory Institutions Private Sector.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
392
 CFATF, 30 October 2012, First follow-up report Curaçao, p.6. 
393
 ‘Competition authority to be established’ (Mededingingsautoriteit in oprichting), 26 March 2013 via 
www.versgeperst.com, [accessed 5 May 2013]. 
394
 See the first five reports of the Commission monitoring their progress 
https://zoek.officielebekendmakingen.nl/kst-33400-IV-25.html. [accessed 5 May 2013]. 
395
 See CFATF, 30 October 2012, First follow-up report Curaçao, for example p.4 and p.6.  
396
 Also see CFATF, 30 October 2012, First follow-up report Curaçao, p.12. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
71 
CURAÇAO 
 

in cassation. It has the power to overturn the decisions of the Court of Justice of Aruba, Curaçao, 
Sint Maarten and of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba, if they do not give due consideration to 
procedural rules, or if their judgments are not in accordance with the applicable law.  
 
ASSESSMENT 
 
Capacity 
 
 
Resources (law) 
Score: 100 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE LAWS SEEKING TO ENSURE APPROPRIATE SALARIES AND WORKING 
CONDITIONS OF THE JUDICIARY? 
 
 
There are comprehensive laws seeking to ensure appropriate judicial salaries, working 
conditions and tenure policies.  
The Court of Justice is responsible for its own personnel and budget management. Since the 
constitutional reform in 2010, the legal framework provides for the participation of the judiciary in the 
405
process of determining annual allocations of the budget. The executive board of the Court of 
Justice sends a proposal for the annual budget before 15 February to the supervisory board, which 
will send a draft annual budget to the Ministers of Justice of Aruba, Curaçao, Sint Maarten and the 
Netherlands, before 15 March. ‘The four ministers’ determine the annual budget of the Court of 
406
Justice in accordance with a share ratio. And hence the executive board of the Court of Justice is 
to indicate to the minister of finance of Curaçao what budget, including investments, is needed in the 
407
opinion of the Court.  
Because the Court of Justice is a legal entity, the personnel are contracted by the legal entity. As for 
personnel, the salaries and benefits of the members of the judiciary are regulated in the Kingdom 
Decree Legal Position Joint Court of Justice (Rijksbesluit rechtspositie Gemeenschappelijk Hof van 
408
Justitie). This decree provides an overview of salary scales which are based on the different 
409
positions and levels of seniority within the judiciary.  
 
 
 
 
 
405
 Kingdom Act Joint Court of Justice, 2010, No.335, Articles 55-58. 
406
 Ibid, Article 57.1. 
407
 Country ordinance Government accounts, 2010, No.87, Articles 34, 38 and 39 and the explanatory 
memorandum. 
408
 Kingdom Decree legal position The Joint Court of Justice (Rijksbesluit rechtspositie 
Gemeenschappelijk Hof van Justitie), State Gazette Kingdom of the Netherlands, 2010, No.358. 
409
 Ibid, Annex Article 4.2, 10.3, 12.2 and 50.2. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
73 
CURAÇAO 
 

Independence (law) 
Score: 100 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE JUDICIARY INDEPENDENT BY LAW? 
 
 
The legal framework contains important provisions to ensure formal independence of the 
judiciary, and the scope for amendments is limited.  
The Kingdom Act of the Joint Court of Justice contains provisions designed to safeguard the 
411
independence of the judiciary. Moreover, the judiciary is anchored in the Constitution. Since the 
constitutional and Kingdom Act provisions are so strictly formulated, and an amendment requires 
consensus of all countries in the Kingdom, the possibilities of amending them are limited.  
412
The Constitution states that any interference with the work of the judiciary is prohibited. Thus, for 
example, any interference with court proceedings is prohibited. Also, there are provisions 
designated to protect judges from undue influence by prohibiting prosecutors from communicating 
413
with judges during trials.  
The members of the Court of Justice and their substitutes are all appointed by Kingdom Decree at 
the proposal of the four ministers of justice of the Kingdom. If a vacancy arises, the Court of Justice 
414
is invited to put forward a non-binding joint recommendation. Judges are appointed for life, that is, 
415
until the age of 70, by Royal Decree. The president of the Court of Justice is appointed as 
416
president for a period of five years.  
Once judges have been appointed, they can only be suspended or fired on precisely specified 
417
grounds. Reasons for suspending or firing a judge must be: unfit for task or loss of Dutch 
418
nationality, being held in detention, convicted for a crime, and declared bankrupt. A judge can only 
419
be suspended or fired by the Supreme Court of the Netherlands or resign on own request by 
420
Kingdom Decree. These limited grounds for suspension or dismissal prevent other parties, such 
as the Executive, from influencing the judiciary by use of threat. 
Also regarding the recruitment process of candidates for the judiciary, there are some safeguards. 
Annually the executive board of the Court of Justice recruits candidates for the ‘judges and 
prosecutors training/education programme’ (Raio – Rechterlijke ambtenaar in opleiding). It publishes 
an advertisement, after which a selection commission selects the candidates based on detailed 
professional criteria. There is room for participation of civil society in the selection procedure. 
Participants are: a lawyer, the dean of the Law Faculty, a representative from the private sector, 
besides the procurator general and the president of the Joint Court. The Raio education programme 
is a six-year programme which an individual must complete successfully in order to become a judge 
421
or public prosecutor. There is no independent Judicial Services Commission or similar body with 
constitutional protection for the appointment and removal of judges. 
The prescribed criteria for candidate judges represent a set of formal qualifications; judges shall be 
Dutch citizens who have a master’s degree in law. The law does prescribe which positions are 
 
411
 Constitution of Curaçao, 2010, No.86, Chapter 7. 
412
 Ibid, Article 98.4. 
413
 Code of conduct Public Prosecutor’s Office, 2011. 
414
 Kingdom Act Joint Court of Justice, 2010, No.335, Article 23.1.  
415
Ibid, Article 25.1. 
416
 Ibid, Article 40.5. 
417
 Ibid, Article 29-34, 37, 39.  
418
 Ibid, Article 30-32. 
419
 Ibid, Article 30.3, 31 and 32. 
420
 Kingdom Decree, Article 30.1. 
421
 Ibid, Chapter 4. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
75 
CURAÇAO 
 

428
van Advocaten) both published a reply in the newspaper and suggested that the lawyer follow the 
formal procedure if he had any complaints. 
 
Governance 
 
Transparency (law) 
Score: 75 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE PROVISIONS IN PLACE TO ENSURE THAT THE PUBLIC CAN OBTAIN RELEVANT 
INFORMATION ON THE ACTIVITIES AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES OF THE JUDICIARY? 
 
 
While a number of laws and provisions exist to allow the public to obtain relevant 
information about the organisation and functioning of the judiciary, a few aspects related to 
the transparency of the judiciary are not covered. 
The legal framework contains a number of requirements designed to ensure transparency of court 
proceedings. The Constitution states that court sessions are to be open to the public, except for a 
few statutory exceptions, for example, in family cases or when young children are involved. The 
verdicts should be stated in public. Journalists can attend all court proceedings and may report on 
429
these in writing, with some exceptions, including family and juvenile cases.  
Moreover, the executive board of the Court of Justice is required to publish its management rules 
(bestuursreglement) in the Official Curaçao Gazette to inform the public about some important 
aspects of its working methods, decision-making processes, organisational structure, and the 
430
division of tasks and replacement of its members in case of illness or other reasons of absence. 
The Kingdom Act does not prescribe a time limit to publish these management rules.  
In addition, the executive board of the Court of Justice is required to deliver its annual report before 
1 April. To whom the report has to be sent is not stipulated. The report is to include a description of 
431
the Court’s activities over the last year and its audited annual accounts. The Court of Justice is 
not obliged to make its annual reports available to the general public. 
The legal framework does not contain any provisions to inform the public proactively about some 
important aspects of the judiciary’s activities such as judicial statistics, appointments and dismissals.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
428
 Curacao Bar Association (Orde van Advocaten) Reactie van de Deken van de Orde van Advocaten 
Curaçao, mr Karel Frielink, op de publiekelijk door mr Eldon “Peppie” Sulvaran geuite beschuldigingen, 22 
March 2012, via www.ordevanadvocaten.an [accessed 26 February 2013]. 
429
 Kingdom Act, The Joint Court of Justice, 2010, No.335, Article 5. 
430
 Ibid, Article 44. 
431
 Ibid, Article 48.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
77 
CURAÇAO 
 

board of the Court is to advance the legal quality and a uniform application of the law within the 
438
Court of Appeal and the Court of First Instance.  
The law requires the judiciary to have a formal complaints and disciplinary procedure, and describes 
the required procedure in detail, stipulating form and timeline for answering. Complaints about 
judges are dealt with by the executive board of the Court. There is no independent body 
investigating complaints against judges, although the board is authorised to install an advisory body 
of three people, one of which may not be a judge. The law does not provide for specific measures to 
protect the complainants. Annually, information about the number and type of complaints must be 
439
published. There are no specific requirements as to how this information is to be published.  
440
Judges are not immune to prosecution for corruption and other criminal offences.  
 
Accountability (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DO MEMBERS OF THE JUDICIARY HAVE TO REPORT AND BE ANSWERABLE FOR THEIR 
ACTIONS IN PRACTICE? 
 
 
While members of the judiciary have to report and be answerable for their actions, the 
existing provisions are not always applied effectively in practice. 
On the positive side, judges do give reasons for their decisions in practice. In case this does not 
happen and the decisions of the judges are poor and not well sustained, there is, in most cases, the 
opportunity to appeal the case at the Court of Justice and after that to go for cassation to the 
Supreme Court in the Netherlands. But in practice this does not happen in most cases. The 
Supreme Court has the power to overturn the decision of the Court of Justice, if it does not give due 
consideration to procedural rules or if its judgments are not in accordance with the applicable law. 
Whether a case reaches the Supreme Court also depends on the ability of the client to pay for the 
costly legal proceedings. In 2011, of the 24 cases of the Court of Justice which were sent to the 
441
Supreme Court, two verdicts had to be withdrawn.  
As noted above, complaints can be submitted to the Court of Justice. At the time of writing, the 
Court of Justice is working on a complaints procedure, but the required official procedure does not 
exist yet. The number and type of complaints has also not yet been published. However, several 
complainants do find their way to the Court of Justice, as the Court receives about 10 complaints a 
year. Complaints are of various kinds: somebody feels mistreated or does not agree with the verdict, 
or is of the opinion that the procedure took too long, etc. As far as could be determined in this 
assessment, up to now, no sanctions have been imposed on judges. To date, no complaints 
advisory bodies have been installed.  
Interviewees are not sure if the security of complainants is always guaranteed in Curaçao at 
present. The interviewed experts didn’t mention concrete examples of intimidation and violence, but 
argued in general that (verbal) attacks and threats have recently increased in Curaçao.  
 
 
 
438
 Ibid, Article 4.2. 
439
 Kingdom Decree, Legal position Joint Court of Justice, 2010, No.358 Chapter 6. 
440
 Penal code, Book 2, Article 130 (active bribery of judges) and 352 (passive bribery of judges). 
441
 Joint Court: Statements objectionable ‘(Hof: uitlatingen laakbaar), 22 March 2012, via 
www.antilliaansdagblad.com [accessed 26 February 2013]. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
79 
CURAÇAO 
 

the negative side, the absence of a published code of conduct for the Court of Justice is seen as an 
omission. Fortunately, according to the interviewed expert, the code is already approved and in the 
448
process of being published.  
Those to be employed at the judiciary are required to take an oath/pledge and to be sworn in, which 
449
in practice is the case.  
 
Role 
 
Executive oversight 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DOES THE JUDICIARY PROVIDE EFFECTIVE OVERSIGHT OF THE EXECUTIVE? 
 
 
The judiciary has considerable legal powers to oversee the activities of the executive. 
However the effectiveness of its actions is limited.  
The primacy for reviewing actions of government lies with the legislature. The legal framework 
provides the judiciary adequate powers in terms of executive oversight. The administrative court has 
jurisdiction to review actions and decisions of state authorities. In 2011, the administrative court had 
450
under its consideration 1,131 administrative cases, nine per cent fewer than in 2010. According to 
the several interviewees who participated in this assessment, administrative law procedures can 
take a considerable amount of time. (Refer to Chapter VII.4 Public Sector and Chapter VII.13 
Business.) 
As noted in Chapter VII.2 Executive, ministers may be held accountable in legal proceedings, 
although they do – similar to members of Parliament – enjoy certain immunity within the chamber of 
Parliament (refer to Chapter VII.1 Legislature). Ministers can be accountable in administrative law 
451
procedures and can also be held personally liable in criminal and civil proceedings; for example 
they can be prosecuted for abuses of office.  
However, even when the Court produces decisions against the government, enforcement of those 
decisions can be problematic. For example, the government tried to suspend the head of the 
Intelligence Service (Veiligheidsdienst Curaçao) and was taken to Court for it several times. The 
Court ruled repeatedly in favour of the Service’s head, and government repeatedly presented 
additional reasons for his dismissal. In practice, the head of the Intelligence Service is still not 
452
allowed to enter his office.  
Another example of the lack of enforcement of decisions concerns 150 administrative cases 
(concerning working and residence permits of immigrants) in which the decisions of the Court were 
not enforced by the minister of justice. In May 2012, the president of the Bar wrote a letter to the 
minister of justice to ask for attention to be given to the lack of enforcement of the decisions of the 
 
448
 Information received from the Court of Justice, 10 May 2013. 
449
 Information received from the Court of Justice, 10 May 2013. 
450
 Joint Court of Justice, Annual report 2011, p.20. 
451
 See Country ordinance Administrative law. 
452
 ‘Lawyer Gums; Government does not accept verdicts (Advocaat Gums: Regering respecteert vonissen 
niet), 8 September 2011, via www.rnw.nl/caribiana/ [accessed 13 May 2013]. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
81 
CURAÇAO 
 

457
Although the executive can ask the judiciary to give advice, the judiciary of Curaçao has to 
maintain a reserved attitude to guarantee its independence and impartiality.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
457
 Kingdom Act, Joint Court of Justice, 2010, No.335, Article 47. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
83 
CURAÇAO 
 

ASSESSMENT 
 
Capacity 
 
Resources (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DOES THE PUBLIC SECTOR HAVE ADEQUATE RESOURCES TO EFFECTIVELY CARRY OUT ITS 
DUTIES? 
 
The amount of financial resources available to the public administration is considered to be 
sufficient to carry out its regular duties, but does not leave much to spare. Attracting 
qualified personnel for top-level positions is not easy, and the hard and soft infrastructure of 
the new country is not yet sufficiently in place. 
As mentioned in the chapter on the Executive, as part of the programme to structurally improve its 
public finances, the Executive is attempting to curb its costs. Specifically with respect to the public 
sector, the Executive has commissioned its internal auditor, SOAB, to investigate together with the 
Ministry of Finance the scope for a smaller, more effective government by curbing overhead costs, 
such as those arising from overwork. SOAB has also been asked to look into the scope for cutting 
464
down on material costs.  
So far, there are no indications that these efforts negatively impact the ability of the public sector to 
effectively carry out its regular duties. Experts from within the public sector indicate that the funds 
available are, broadly speaking, sufficient to achieve the public sector’s regular duties in as far as 
those can be labelled as a ‘going concern’. However, budgets are not considered to be generous. 
They are also not considered to be sufficient to take on many additional, larger projects, such as 
those related to the creation of a legislative database, communications or adequate work 
environments. Whereas such projects may have been taken up using subsidies from SONA, 
previously known as the Netherlands Antilles Development Foundation and in large part financed by 
the Dutch government, adequate funding now requires prioritisation within the government’s own 
budget.  
As for personnel expenses, there is an upper limit on the total number of full-time equivalents (FTEs) 
that a given ministry may utilise each year, specified by country ordinance. For all ministries 
combined, the total is now capped at 4,045 FTEs. However, in case a ministry reaches its 
465
maximum, temporary staff may be hired to a specified maximum and for a limited time only. 
Moreover, at the time of writing there is a freeze on vacancies, in force since July 2012 and only 
allowing for exceptions for so-called ‘critical functions’. In practice, the freeze on vacancies is more 
or less complied with, and in this assessment not reported to be a pressing problem. Also, salaries 
are considered to be appropriate, at least for lower- and middle-ranking civil servants. Moreover, 
other labour conditions, such as holidays and dismissal protection, are generally considered to be 
better than those of the private sector.  
However, experts did consistently report problems attracting sufficiently qualified personnel for top-
level positions and some specialised functions, and salaries for those positions are reported to be 
too low compared to those of the private sector. Another point of concern is related to the 
reorganisation resulting from the new country status. As mentioned earlier in the assessment of the 
Executive, approximately a quarter of all civil servants objected to their newly-assigned position, and 
 
464
 Curaçao Budget 2013, Country Gazette 2013, No.10, Letter of Finance (Nota van Financiën), p.61. 
465
 Country ordinance Organisation public administration, Article 14. Also refer to Articles 15 , 16 and 19. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
85 
CURAÇAO 
 

474
certain rank are to be decided upon by the Council of Ministers, while others are required to be 
475
discussed within the Council. According to one expert interviewed, the current regulations thus 
leave at least ‘some room’ for political interference with appointments. And although the law does 
include several specific and concrete grounds for (non-voluntary) dismissal, some provisions – such 
476
as ‘incompetence or ineptitude for the position’ – also do allow for more arbitrary decisions. Other 
rules related to sensitive issues such as public procurement, the management of state property and 
477
the issuing of permits, similarly allow for discretionary room for the Executive. For example, 
although open bidding is to be the rule for public procurement above certain specified estimated 
contract sums, the regulations allow for deviation from this principle. Thus, the Executive may 
478
decide that the projects ‘by their very nature’ are not to be considered for open bidding, and rules 
for closed bidding below the estimated contract sums require the Executive to ‘as much as possible’ 
479
choose between at least three offers. (Also see below under Role.) 
Other than the court, there is no institution dedicated to protect civil servants employees against 
arbitrary dismissals or political interference. Such an institution does exist for board members of 
public companies and public foundations, the corporate governance advisor SBTNO, albeit that 
480
SBTNO may only advise and does not have supervisory or sanctioning powers. SBTNO advises 
government on the application of the corporate governance provisions related to appointment and 
dismissal procedures of board members, including profiles functions, as well as on issues related to 
481
dividend policies and the buying and selling of bonds. With the introduction of the corporate 
governance code in 2010, the required governance structure of public companies and public 
foundations now also provides specific safeguards for their independence. This includes provisions 
to prevent conflicts of interests, and to ensure the required levels of expertise and specification of 
482
the respective responsibilities of directors, supervisory boards and, where relevant, shareholders. 
483
After some thorough discussions about the proper division of authorities, and notwithstanding the 
484
fact that there is always room for improvement, according to most experts interviewed the current 
model charter is an important step towards good governance of public entities. (Also see under 
Integrity, below.) 
 
 
 
 
474
 Country decree of 7 February 2012, no.12/1396, regarding the publication in the Country Gazette of 
the Regulations of the Council of Ministers (Landsbesluit houdende de bekendmaking in het 
Publicatieblad van het reglement van orde voor de raad van ministers), Country Gazette 2012, No.14, 
Article 4.  
475
 Ibid., Article 5. 
476
 Country ordinance Legal and material rights and obligations of civil servants, Article 103. Also Articles 
5 and 94. 
477
 Also Oberon Nauta, Good Governance in ‘The West’. Institutional and Social Constraints of Good 
Governance in the Caribbean Parts of the Dutch Kingdom (Goed bestuur in de West, Institutionele en 
maatschappelijke beperkingen voor goed bestuur in de Caribische rijksdelen) (Oisterwijk: Uitgeverij 
BOXPress 2011, 2011), p.198.  
478
 Island ordinance Financial management Curaçao (Eilandsverordening Financieel beheer Curaçao), 
Official Curaçao Gazette 1953, No.6 as later adapted, Article 12. See the section on Public procurement 
on the legal status of this ordinance. 
479
 Ibid. 
480
 Island ordinance Corporate governance (Eilandsverordening Corporate governance), Official Curaçao 
Gazette 2009, No.92, Article 4. 
481
 Ibid.  
482
 Island decree Code corporate governance Curaçao (Eilandsbesluit Code corporate governance 
Curaçao), Official Curaçao Gazette, 2009, No.96. 
483
 See, for example, Commissie onderzoek Curaçao, Do it yourselves (Doe het zelf) (S.l.: Commissie 
onderzoek Curaçao: 30 September 2011), pp.33-34. 
484
 See for some suggestions, for example, K. Frielink, ‘Looking back at the future: future developments in 
corporate governance in Curaçao’ (Terugblik op de toekomst: de verdere ontwikkeling van corporate 
governance in Curaçao), Lecture on seminar Checks and balances in corporate governance on Curaçao, 
21 January 2013.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
87 
CURAÇAO 
 

The hands-on approach extends beyond appointment and dismissal procedures, as was, for 
example, illustrated by the Court of Audit (ARC – Algemene Rekenkamer Curaçao) in a report 
published in 2010. In this report, the Court reported on the course of events around the issuing of 
leasehold land in 2007 to people not, or only recently placed, on the relevant waiting list. The 
administrative head of the unit responsible was bypassed completely and judicial advice not always 
followed, and the Court of Audit concluded that the Executive had seriously violated the principle of 
491
good governance. More recently, the Executive is considered to continue to directly interfere with 
administrative matters, with ministers signing where the administration is supposed to, and a 
492
sometimes ‘intimidating control’ from above. Interference may well also take the passive form of 
non-decision making, regardless of administrative preparations, for example non-enforcement of 
493
building regulations and non-enforcement in general, or a lack of action on citizens’ petitions. 
However, statistics are not available and perceptions as to the frequency of undue influence differ. 
Some experts interviewed in the course of this assessment argue that, yes, ‘it sometimes happens’ 
and stress that it differs between ministries, while others perceive a more persistent influence.  
As for public entities, as already referred to in the chapter on the Executive, the introduction of the 
corporate governance advisor has significantly increased transparency in the appointment and 
dismissal procedures. The advisor has also issued some advice related to dividend policies. 
However, although the Executive often follows the advisor’s advice, it does not always do so, and in 
some cases those involved have taken their case to court. The Executive has also yet to adopt 
494
specific function profiles. Moreover, despite the introduction of a corporate governance code and 
a corporate governance advisor, the Executive’s prevailing opinion is still that the composition of 
board members of public entities should ‘resemble as much as possible the new composition of the 
495
recently-appointed political leadership’. In some cases, short communication lines between 
political parties and candidates put forward by those political parties feed suggestions of a lack of 
independence in practice. (Also refer to Chapter VII.10 Political Parties.) In addition, members of 
supervisory boards and the Executive does sometimes stretch its authority to the limit, and, 
according to some, beyond. Thus, for example, for six months in 2011 the board of directors of one 
public company, Integrated Utility Holding NV (Aqualectra), was required to have all expenses and 
financial commitments above NAf 50 (US$ 28) approved in writing beforehand by the supervisory 
board. In subsequent court proceedings involving the company, the phrase ‘mismanagement’ 
496
(wanbeleid) was used to either describe the actions of members of the board of directors, 
presumably necessitating the measure, or the actions of members of the supervisory board, 
497
presumably for unduly interfering with the activities of the board of directors.  
 
 
491
 ARC, Report 078/10/CUR, 23 December 2010, regarding Definite report on the investigation into the 
regularity and efficiency of the 1st issuing of leasehold land to waiting list candidates (Definitief 
ste
deelrapport betreffende het onderzoek naar de recht- en doelmatigheid van de 1 uitgifte van 
erfpachtgrond aan wachtlijstkandidaten ten behoeve van de eigen woningbouw), p.18. 
492
 See, for example, Brede Kristensen, ‘Critical success factor of the Curaçao transition process’ 
(Kritische succesfactoren van het Curaçaose transitieproces). In: Huisden & Kristensen 2012: 97.  
493
 See also KLPD, 2009: 141. 
494
See, for example SBTNO, Advice regarding resolution appointment members RvC of CPA (Advies 
inzake voornemen benoeming leden RvC van CPA (art. 9, AB 2009, no.92)), 14 May 2013. 
495
 SBTNO, Advice regarding resolution to collective/massive dismissal board members of public 
foundations and members of supervisory boards of public companies (Advies inzake voornemen tot 
collectief/massaal ontslag bestursleden van de overheidsstichtingen en leden van de RvC van de 
overheidsvennootschappen (art. 10, AB 2009, no. 92)), 15 February 2013. Also Cft, Changed composition 
board of directors and supervisory board public entities (Gewijzigde samenstelling besturen en RvC 
overheidsentiteiten), 12 February 2012. 
496
 As referred to in the Judgment of 20 January 2012, Court of First Instance Curacao, LJN BV2223.  
497
 Trial brief of the procurator general of the Public Prosecutor’s Office, 5 June 2013, concerning the 
request to the Joint Court of Justice to order a civil inquiry into the policies and course of events of the 
public companies Aqualecta, Curoil/Curgas and Refinería di Kòrsou (RdK), via the Facebook page of the 
Public Prosecutor’s Office [accessed 12 June 2013]. Compare Trial brief concerning Integrated Utility 
Holding N.V. vs the Public Prosecutor’s Office, Mr. K. Frielink, Case number EJ 60654/13, 5 June 2013 
(Pleitnotitie Mr. K. Frielink), point 10, via www.dutchcaribbeanlegalportal.com [accessed 12 June 2013]. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
89 
CURAÇAO 
 

in several decisions, as well as a requirement to annually inform Parliament about its management 
503
of state property. (Also refer to the section on Public Procurement below.) 
There are no regulations requiring the disclosure of declaration of personal assets, income or 
financial interests of senior officials in the administration.  
504
By civil law, larger public companies are required to publish their annual reports and accounts, or, 
505
more precisely, to make those reports available for inspection to interested parties. Smaller 
506
companies and public foundations are not required to do so. The corporate governance code 
assumes annual reports and annual accounts to be public documents, and also refers to annual 
507
reports when discussing ‘other public’ documents. However, the code neither explicitly nor clearly 
508
mentions that public companies and public foundations are required to make their reports public. 
Public companies and public foundations may do so but are not required to accept invitations of 
509
Parliament to provide information. Public companies and public foundations are not covered by 
the country ordinance on public access to government information.  
 
Transparency (practice)  
Score: 25 
 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THE PROVISIONS ON TRANSPARENCY IN FINANCIAL, HUMAN RESOURCE AND 
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR EFFECTIVELY IMPLEMENTED? 
 
Although the administration is reported to be working to improve transparency, as yet 
transparency in financial, human resource and information management in the public sector 
is not sufficient. Transparency is limited for public companies and almost completely absent 
for public foundations.  
Although there are differences between ministries and agencies, in general, according to those 
experts interviewed, there is too little transparency and too much bureaucracy in the public sector. 
Thus, for example, transparency in processes related to the issuing of permits, such as the expected 
waiting time and the reasons for not yet issuing them, could be improved. Customers are able to 
direct their queries to Bentana di Informashon, and in general the Bentana reportedly offers 
professional and relevant advice, but its function does not go far beyond the provision of general 
information. For more specific questions, the public is dependent on individual agencies. More 
generally, as reported earlier in the chapter assessing the Executive, there are no recent reports on 
the implementation of the regulations to ensure public access to government information. The 
administration is reported to be working on an information policy, which includes additional efforts to 
streamline and digitalise the process of issuing permits (Vergunningenloket). It is also working on 
efficiency improvements through the introduction of a shared service centre to include supporting 
 
503
 Country ordinance State property (Landsverordening Domaniale gronden), Official Curaçao Gazette 
2010, No.87, Appendix u, Article 11.  
504
 Civil Code, Book 2, Article 119. 
505
 Ibid., Article 122. 
506
 Ibid., Title V.4. 
507
 Corporate governance code, 5.1 and 3.12. The code is based on the Dutch ‘Code Tabaksblat’, a 
corporate governance code for listed companies.  
508
 Corporate governance code, 5.1 and 3.12. 
509
 Council of State, Request to the Council of State for advice on the provision of information to 
Parliament by public entities (limited liability companies, foundations and legal persons instituted by public 
law) (Verzoek aan de Raad van Advies om advies inzake verstrekking van inlichtingen aan de Staten 
door overheidsentiteiten (naamloze vennootschappen, stichtingen en bij wet ingestelde rechtspersonen)), 
Case number 2012/25443, RVA NO. RA/14-12-DIV 31/01/2013.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
91 
CURAÇAO 
 

breach of integrity within the organisation, are required to report this to their unit manager who, in 
516
turn, is to inform the minister responsible. The internal inquiry may find grounds for disciplinary 
measures, such as fines, a freeze on promotion or dismissal, and can also result in organisational 
measures to prevent the integrity breach from happening again. Depending on the case at hand, 
and mandatory in case of, among others, abuses of office, it may also involve reporting the case to 
517
the Public Prosecutor’s Office.  
There are no provisions to report misconduct anonymously, but the law does provide for a confidant, 
which allows civil servants to address integrity issues on a confidential basis and be advised on how 
518
to deal with knowledge of possible breaches of integrity in the organisation. The confidant cannot 
be instructed by management, and is only required to report twice a year to the minister responsible 
in a confidential and anonymised report about the number of times advice was sought and the types 
519
of integrity breaches mentioned. Moreover, in view of further policy development and adjustment, 
the minister of general affairs is required to put in place additional regulations concerning the 
520
registration and use of the integrity data compiled.  
However, the law only includes a general provision to protect whistleblowers, which states that a 
whistleblower is not to be disadvantaged in any way in as far as he or she has acted in good faith 
521
and does not stand to gain personally from the integrity breach or its notification. There are no 
concrete protective measures, such as a provision to prove that possible charges against the 
whistleblower are not linked to the act of whistleblowing. Moreover, although the law facilitates 
whistleblowing on suspected integrity breaches from within one’s own organisation, it does not 
provide for those outside the organisation – such as those previously employed there – to do so. 
And because of the overall responsibility of ministers for the internal inquiries, neither does it allow 
for an effective procedure to report suspected integrity breaches of the Executive. As yet, and as 
discussed in more detail in the chapter on anti-corruption activities, Curaçao does not have an 
independent integrity office to serve as a registration point or hotline for integrity issues. There are 
also no specific requirements for government to report to Parliament about its integrity policy.  
Citizens have the constitutional right to submit petitions in writing, and the administrative 
522
organisation is required to answer within a reasonable period of time. There are also several 
provisions for citizens to file complaints. According to the Ombudsman, several ministries are also 
working on their own regulations to handle complaints, and whereas some are only at the beginning 
of this process, other ministries are already well underway. However, as yet, there are no uniform 
petition and complaints procedures and in practice citizens are faced with a variety of sometimes 
523
diverging procedures. In addition, of course, citizens may also file a complaint to the Ombudsman 
or they may appeal a decision of an administrative unit in court, provided that the decision directly 
524
concerns them. (Also refer to Chapter VII.7 Ombudsman.)  
The Criminal Code contains dedicated chapters on crimes and offences committed by civil servants 
in their official capacity. Punishable offences include bribery, abuse of authority, extortion, fraud and 
525
bribery, as well as lesser offences such as making public confidential information, or withholding 
526
government property. (Also see below on Integrity.)   
 
516
 Ibid., Article 86. 
517
 Ibid. Also, Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 200. 
518
 Country ordinance Legal and material rights and obligations of civil servants, Section 15. 
519
 Ibid., Article 85. 
520
 Ibid., Articles 85 and 86 and the explanatory memorandum. 
521
 Ibid., Article 87. 
522
 Constitution, Article 7. 
523
 Also cf. Ombudsman of Curaçao, Annual Report 2011 (Curaçao, Ombudsman of Curaçao: December 
2012), p.10. 
524
 Country ordinance Administrative law (Landsverordening Administratieve rechtspraak), Country 
Gazette 2006, No.71. 
525
 Penal Code, Book 2, Title XXVIII. 
526
 Penal Code, Book 3, Title VIII. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
93 
CURAÇAO 
 

been appointed. Every ministry is reported to have a complaints official, but as yet there is neither a 
536
central complaints procedure nor a central register of complaints.  
As a result, the administration itself does not have an overview of the number and type of 
whistleblower reports and complaints. More information is available on complaints about the 
administration from the Ombudsman, who annually publishes several statistics. Thus, for example, 
in 2011, the Ombudsman received 328 formal complaints related to ministries, service departments 
537
included. Many complaints dealt with by the Ombudsman concern the issuing of immigration 
permits and passports, land management and requests for financial support, for example related to 
538
long, drawn-out procedures. Several of the complaints filed also relate to suspected integrity 
breaches, but those complaints are not reported on separately. In some cases, the Ombudsman 
539
also investigates on his/her own initiative. On an individual case basis, many complaints are dealt 
with successfully, but structural improvements are more difficult to attain. (Also refer to Chapter VII.7 
Ombudsman.) Administrative law procedures are also used in practice. However, as one expert 
pointed out, they seem to lose some of their effectiveness because it can take a considerable 
amount of time for procedures to be considered in court. Moreover, in case of a lack of decision 
making, effective redress may take even longer, because court proceedings often result in a ‘judicial 
540
perpetuum mobile’ with, again, long drawn-out procedures. 
The Public Prosecutor’s Office does not publish separate statistics for charges related to abuses of 
office or related offences. However, civil servants are in practice sometimes convicted for 
wrongdoing. Thus, for example, in 2010 seven civil servants of the public registry were reported for, 
inter alia, forgery and fraud, and later convicted. Among other things, they were not allowed to take 
541
on a position as civil servant for five years. However, several experts noted that although there 
are adequate provisions to report abuses, in practice due to the risks involved in naming and 
shaming (in, for example, newspapers) and fear of job loss, only a few people actually consider filing 
charges. 
Administrative agencies are also audited, and the Court of Audit does report positive developments 
542
in parts of the administration’s financial management. However, so far, the Court of Audit’s main 
conclusion is that Curaçao’s financial management cannot yet be described as orderly and 
543
auditable. And a self-assessment concludes that, although procedures are sufficient, the number 
of internal controls, as well as the number of audits of the administration’s internal accountant, 
SOAB, need to be increased. The self-assessment also notes that recommendations of the internal 
544
accountant are only partly observed in practice. (Also refer to Chapter VII.8 Supreme Audit and 
Supervisory Institutions Public Sector.) In a report on the issuing of leasehold land to waiting-list 
candidates, the Court of Audit hardened its tone, and judged the failure to provide copies of 
545
concluded leasehold land decrees, according to the government ‘an omission’, to be ‘very severe’. 
 
536
 Also see Commission of experts, Assessment of government apparatus Curaçao and Sint Maarten 
(s.l.: Commission of experts, May 2010), p.43. 
537
See, for example, Ombudsman of Curaçao November 2012: 17. 
538
 See, for example, Ombudsman of Curaçao, November 2012: 20-21. 
539
 See,for example, Ombudsfunktionaris of Curaçao, Annual Report of the Ombudsfunktionaris of the 
Island Territory of Curaçao 2009 (Curaçao: Ombudsfunktionaris of Curaçao, May 2011): p.26; 
Ombudsfunktionaris of Curaçao, Annual Report of the Ombudsfunktionaris of the Island Territory of 
Curaçao 2008 (Curaçao: Ombudsfunktionaris of Curaçao, May 2011): p31. 
540
 Trial brief Foundation for a Clean Environment on Curaçao (SMOC) (Pleitaantekeningen Stichting 
Schoon Milieu op Curaçao [SMOC]), HLAR 48338-2012, 2 April 2012. 
541
 Public Prosecutor’s Office Curaçao, Annual Report 2011 (Curaçao, Public Prosecutor’s Office: s.d.), 
p.17. 
542
 ARC, Report of activities during the years 2009, 2010 and 2011 (Curaçao: ARC, October 2012), p.21.  
543
 Ibid., p.13. 
544
 Cft October 2011: 8-9. Also Cft, Report of findings. PEFA-assessment financial management Curacao 
(Rapport van bevindingen. PEFA-inventarisatie financieel beheer Curacao) (Curaçao: Cft: February 
2013): pp.28-29. 
545
 ARC 23 December 2010: 22. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
95 
CURAÇAO 
 

554
the decisions of unit managers are to be registered. Also, civil servants are not allowed to accept 
public works contracts, public supply contracts and public service contracts, or provide guarantees 
555
for or – directly or indirectly – have an interest in those activities. And they may also be – but are 
not necessarily – prohibited from being a board member or shareholder of companies, foundations 
556
and associations which regularly come or may come into contact with the unit in question.  
Civil servants are also prohibited from accepting gifts without prior permission of their unit 
557 558
manager. Gifts representing a value of more than NAf 100 (ca. US$ 56) are not permitted, and 
neither is the acceptance of gifts offered in the course of granting a commission. Civil servants may 
never request or promote the offering of those services that could influence the performance of their 
duties and must inform their supervisors of any such offers. Again, registration is required, including 
559
of gifts offered and the decisions of unit managers whether or not to accept them. However, there 
are no post-employment restrictions, such as those prohibiting civil servants from joining 
organisations they supervised as part of their office duties.  
Civil servants are also bound to secrecy unless given prior permission, and may not abuse 
560
information collected in the course of their duties. They may also not use their work hours nor 
561
government-owned property to further their own or third parties’ private interests. Moreover, if a 
civil servant is regarded as a suspect in an ongoing criminal investigation, he may [but is not 
562
required to] be suspended.  
Importantly, an additional safeguard to ensure the integrity of civil servants is incorporated in the 
regulations regarding the activities of the Security Service Curaçao (VDC –Veiligheidsdienst 
Curaçao). For positions involving confidentiality (vertrouwensfuncties), a thorough and regular 
563
screening by the Security Service is mandatory. These positions are likely to include staff 
positions at ministries and at the top of the police force. They may also include management and 
other positions in so-called ‘vital sectors’, such as the production and distribution of drinking water, 
564
electricity, telecommunications and (air)ports. To date, however, no positions have been classified 
as such. (Also refer to Chapter VII.2 Executive.) 
As mentioned above, abuses of office, such as bribery and extortion, are criminal offences. 
Deliberately accepting – directly or indirectly – public works contracts or public supply contracts 
565
while being assigned to manage or supervise them, is also a criminal offence. Moreover, there is 
a general provision which requires civil servants to report abuses of office and other related crimes 
of which they have become aware while carrying out their official duties, with a few exceptions such 
566
as those related to the risk of incriminating oneself.  
The corporate governance code also contains several provisions to safeguard the integrity of both 
members of boards of directors and supervisory boards of public companies and public foundations. 
Thus, for example, it contains provisions designed to prevent conflicts of interest. This includes the 
requirement to prevent the perception of a conflict of interest, and a notification requirement for 
potential conflicts of interests. There is no explicit provision prohibiting the acceptance of gifts from 
third parties, but there is a provision to prohibit gifts from the public entity. There are no provisions to 
 
554
 Ibid., Article 52.  
555
 Ibid., Article 54.  
556
 Ibid., Article 55 
557
 Ibid., Article 58. 
558
 Ibid. According to Article 59, the precise amount may be determined, that is, adapted, by country 
decree.  
559
 Ibid., Article 59. Also see Article 61. 
560
 Ibid., Articles 62 and 63. 
561
 Ibid., Articles 47 and 57. 
562
 Ibid., Article 94. 
563
 Country ordinance Safety service Curacao (Landsverordening Veiligheidsdienst Curaçao), Offical 
Curaçao Gazette, 2010, No.87, Appendix j, Article 15.  
564
 Ibid., explanatory memorandum to Article 15.  
565
 Penal Code, Book 2, Title XXVIII, Article 361. 
566
 Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 200.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
97 
CURAÇAO 
 

Role 
 
Public education 
Score: 0 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DOES THE PUBLIC SECTOR INFORM AND EDUCATE THE PUBLIC ON ITS ROLE IN FIGHTING 
CORRUPTION? 
 
The public sector does not presently engage in any significant activities designed to inform 
the public about corruption-related matters.  
The average citizen is considered to be reasonably informed about where and how to complain 
about corrupt practices in as far as it concerns external complaint procedures through the 
Ombudsman and the law enforcement agencies. Also, the Ombudsman now has a new website 
570
which allows the public to file a complaint about the conduct of administrative bodies. However, 
according to the Ombudsman, not all administrative bodies are equally receptive to dealing with 
complaints. Some administrative bodies are reported to be accessible and accommodating, while 
other units barely cooperate or do not cooperate at all, as a result of which complaints resolutions 
571
are very difficult. (Also refer to Chapter VII.7 Ombudsman.) 
Moreover, according to the experts interviewed, there are no specific programmes run by the public 
sector to educate the public on corruption and how to curb it. There have been some efforts in the 
past, for example using posters to inform the public of integrity programmes run within the public 
sector. There are also some policy plans to communicate quality standards and principles of 
administrative integrity in the public sector. However, as yet, the public sector does not actively 
inform the public about its role in preventing corrupt practices. 
 
Cooperation with third parties 
Score: 25 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DOES THE PUBLIC SECTOR WORK WITH PUBLIC WATCHDOG AGENCIES, BUSINESS AND CIVIL 
SOCIETY ON ANTI-CORRUPTION INITIATIVES? 
 
 
Apart from initiatives to further financial integrity within the framework of (C)FATF, the public 
sector hardly works with public watchdog agencies, business and civil society on anti-
corruption initiatives.  
Curaçao participates in the (Caribbean) Financial Action Task Force (C)FATF regarding anti-money 
laundering and the combating of terrorist financing, which is further discussed in the chapter on the 
supervisory institutions of the private sector (Chapter VII.14). In addition, the current coalition 
partners have committed to ‘concrete programmes and projects aimed to strengthen the integrity 
and quality of government and administration’ and to do so in close collaboration with local, regional 
572
and international organisations specialising in these issues.  
However, as yet no initiatives of the public sector actively working with public watchdog agencies, 
business and civil society on anti-corruption initiatives have been reported. Also, Curaçao’s activities 
 
570
 See www.ombudsman-curacao.cw [accessed 27 May 2013].  
571
 Ombudsman van Curaçao November 2012: Section 2.5. 
572
 Coalition agreement aimed at peace, tranquility and prosperity, period 2012-2016 (Akuerdo pa un 
Gobernashon enfoká riba pas, trankilidat i prosperidat, period 2012-2016), 12 December 2012, p.6. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
99 
CURAÇAO 
 

Moreover, even though, as noted above, the public is generally well informed about the services of 
the Ombudsman, it is not so well known that the Ombudsman also serves to investigate complaints 
related to public procurement, and it is understood that only very few such complaints have been 
579
reported to the Ombudsman. There is no competition authority in place to enforce fair competition 
and sanction anti-competitive behaviour in procurement processes. 
More generally, as already mentioned above, there are some specific provisions and corresponding 
criminal law provisions related to integrity breaches in public procurement. Also, there are some 
rules related to the registration of those authorised by the minister to conduct private legal acts and 
also register the amount to which they are entitled to do so. The register is required to be made 
public, and needs to be republished whenever changes are registered. The general public, including 
suppliers and service providers, should thus be able to assure themselves that those signing 
580
contracts are indeed authorised to do so. However, as was already referred to in the chapter 
assessing Parliament, this register does not yet exist, and some months ago Parliament voted in 
581
favour of a motion to request the Executive to create the register. Furthermore, the results of 
582
bidding processes are not always made public in practice.  
In practice, the procedures as currently used for public procurement are reported to leave a lot of 
leeway. According to some experts interviewed, it is also not sufficiently clear what procedures to 
follow in case open bidding in not used, which allows for preferential treatment towards some and 
not others. Consequently, the practice of public procurement is also reported to differ between 
ministries and agencies, and it is certainly no exception that open bidding is not used, often because 
such procedures take a lot of time, or because there is only a very small number of possible 
suppliers to choose from.  
When sufficiently motivated, these reasons may very well be valid. However, there have also been a 
number of cases in which the procedures followed raised questions, in several instances also 
related to involvement of the Executive. According to the Crime Analysis of 2008, there have been 
several cases in which companies could be awarded government contracts in exchange for secret 
583
donations to political parties. This also resulted in several convictions. More recently, since 
October 2010, questions were raised about, for example, the procurement of traffic island and road 
584 585
signage, building facilities for a decompression chamber, and the outsourcing of the recruitment 
586
of the new administrative organisation. Similar questions have been asked in relation to 
procurement decisions of public companies or public foundations, for example in relation to the 
587 588
repair works in the educational sector, a lease concession at the harbour, and the building of a 
589
solar panel park. Not all questions raised have yet been answered, and some are currently under 
investigation. Moreover, not all conclusions of investigations already conducted have been made 
public. However, more generally, on more than one occasion investigations into public contracting 
found irregularities, such as missing executive decisions, incomplete contracts for rental 
arrangements, as well as unmotivated deviation of administrative advice by the Executive. In a 2009 
report about the renting of buildings, the Court of Audit concluded that direct interference of 
 
579
 Cft October 2011: 8. 
580
 Country ordinance Government accounts 2010, Article 40. 
581
 ‘Motion public register adopted’ (Motie openbaar register aangenomen), 20 February 2013, via 
www.versgeperst.com [accessed 16 April 2013]. 
582
 Cft October 2011: 8. Cf. Cft February 2013: 27. 
583
 KLPD, 2009: 139. 
584
 ‘Also irregularities with road signage’ (Ook onregelmatigheden met verkeersborden), 23 March 2013, 
via www.kkcuracao.com [accessed 7 June 2013]. 
585
 ‘SOAB investigation decompression chamber’ (SOAB-onderzoek naar druktank), 19 March 2013, via 
www.kkcuracao.com [accessed 7 June 2013]. 
586
 Eustatius, 2012: 41. 
587
 ‘Unanimous for improvement Feffik’ (Unaniem voor verbetering Feffik), 16 March 2013 via 
www.kkcuracao.com [accessed 4 June 2013]. 
588
 CPA commissioners wanted to force concession through (CPA commissarissen wilden consessie 
doordrukken), 16 January 2013 via www.kkcuracao.com [7 June 2013]. 
589
 ‘Agreement Aqualectra for solar panels’ (Akkoord Aqualectra voor zonnepanelen), 27 June 2012 via 
www.versgeperst.com [7 June 2013]. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
101 
CURAÇAO 
 

VII.5 LAW ENFORCEMENT 
AGENCIES 
STRUCTURE AND ORGANISATION 
Curaçao has a number of agencies whose main task is law enforcement. Since 10 October 2010, 
and as part of the agreements between the Kingdom partners to reorganise constitutional relations, 
the Police Force Curaçao (KPC – Korps Politie Curaçao) was introduced, with special investigation 
units such as the Bureau for Financial Investigations (Bureau Financiele Onderzoeken) which 
already existed before 2010. Other local law enforcement agencies are the Landsrecherche, 
Curaçao’s special police force established as a unit for the former Netherlands Antilles in 1996, and 
dedicated to investigating possible criminal conduct of government officials and public servants. In 
addition to these local law enforcement agencies, in 2001 the Police Investigation Cooperation 
Team (RST – Recherche Samenwerkingsteam) was established. The main task of this cooperation 
between the Kingdom countries is the investigation of international and organised crime, and crimes 
592
for which special expertise is required. 
The organisational and management structure and the tasks of the police forces are laid down in the 
593
Kingdom Act Police of Curaçao, Sint Maarten and Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba (referred to 
below as Kingdom Act Police) which came into force on 10 October 2010.  
In addition, as of 10 October 2010, the Kingdom Act on the Law Enforcement Council (RvdR – Raad 
594
voor de Rechtshandhaving) came into force. This Act positions the Law Enforcement Council 
(temporary) as an independent inspectorate for Curaçao, Sint Maarten and the Caribbean part of the 
Netherlands. Its board, only appointed in May 2011, has three members. The Council is responsible 
for the general inspection of the effectiveness, quality of the performance of duties and management 
of institutions such as the police, police training bodies, the Public Prosecutor’s Office and the 
595
prison. The Council is also charged with the general inspection of the quality and effectiveness of 
judicial cooperation between the Kingdom partners, such as cooperation between the three police 
forces, cooperation in the fight against cross-border crime, the mutual exchange of detention 
capacity, and the Coast Guard in as far as it is concerned with the judicial tasks of the Coast 
596
Guard. The Council may not interfere in individual criminal investigations or prosecutions of 
punishable acts.  
Although the Constitution includes the Public Prosecutor’s Office together with the Joint Court of 
597
Justice as belonging to the judiciary, the Constitution also states that the procurator general, as 
head of the Public Prosecutor’s Office, is responsible for the judicial police (justitiële politie) and 
underscores the procurator general’s leading role in the detection and prosecution of punishable 
598
acts. The procurator general is also to guard the proper exercise of police tasks. The legal powers 
 
592
 See RST Protocol 30 November 2001, Articles 1 and 2 and RST’s annual plan 2013, 12 December 
2012, p.4. 
593
 State Gazette Kingdom of the Netherlands, 2010, No.337, Article 4 concerns the KPC, Article 9 the 
Landsrecherche Curaçao and Article 57a the Recherche Samenwerkingsteam (below: Kingdom Act 
Police). 
594
 State Gazette Kingdom of the Netherlands, 2010, No. 338, Kingdom Act on the Law Enforcement 
Council. Also refer to Articles 42 and 32 of that Act. 
595
 Ibid, Article 3.2 and the explanatory memorandum. 
596
 Ibid, Article 3.3 and the explanatory memorandum.  
597
 Constitution of Curaçao (Staatsregeling van Curaçao), Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, No. 86. Article 
105. 
598
 Constitution, Article 107 and the explanatory memorandum 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
103 
CURAÇAO 
 

603
report shows improvement in some fields, for example housing, but not in others. Agreement 
604
about personnel issues with the police trade unions, as required by law, has not yet been reached 
and the country’s fiscal situation negatively affects the project’s progress.  
The interviewees argued that, ever since its establishment in 1996, the special police force has 
suffered from inadequate resources, both in terms of finances as well as staffing and housing 
facilities. According to the formation plan (see below), the special police force should employ 24 
605
people, but in practice there is a staff of 11 people. This lack of resources has put restrictions on 
the number of cases investigated. At present, the ‘Establishment and Formation Plan’ (Inrichting- en 
formatieplan, I&F 2011) of the special police force has been approved by the government and is 
waiting to be formalised and executed.  
The police force (Police Force Curaçao and the special police force) is funded through the regular 
Curaçao State budget according to its approved budget to be determined by the minister of justice of 
Curaçao in accordance with the minister of finance of Curaçao. As administrative bodies responsible 
to the minister of justice, the police force budgets remain at the discretion of the minster of justice, 
and to use it the police force needs to follow several administrative procedures which suffer long 
606
delays. In practice, up to now the approved budget has always been less than the actual budget. 
The budget of the Police Force Curaçao was supplemented with subsidies from the Executing 
607
Agency of the Foundation for the Development of the Netherlands Antilles (USONA), previously 
known as the Netherlands Antilles Development Foundation and in large part financed by the Dutch 
government. These subsidies ended in 2012.  
608
The ministers of justice of the three Kingdom countries determine the annual budget of the Public 
Prosecutor’s Office Curaçao in accordance with a share ratio determined by the Council of Ministers 
of the Kingdom and in accordance with the goals and activities mentioned in the Public Prosecutor’s 
609
Office annual plan. The resources available to the Public Prosecutor’s Office are considered to be 
adequate. In general there is an adequate number of public prosecutors.  
However, there are some serious concerns about both the Police Force Curaçao, the special police 
force and to a lesser extent the Public Prosecutor’s Office. Financial and human resources are not 
610
always managed in an efficient and effective way to enable all tasks to be performed properly. For 
instance, some current police officers are said to be overburdened, while others appear to have time 
on their hands. Moreover, the quality of human resources is mentioned as a serious concern. There 
is a structural lack of specific expertise, such as financial and forensic expertise. For instance, the 
special police indicated the need for a chartered accountant and the Public Prosecutor’s Office 
indicated the need for public prosecutors with financial experience. In addition, several respondents 
expressed doubts about the language level of staff members of the police and to a lesser extent of 
staff members of the Public Prosecutor’s Office. In recent decades the local language, Papiamentu, 
has gained significance in the educational system in Curaçao, and knowledge of the Dutch language 
has declined. However, all laws and other legal documents are published in Dutch and the 
prescribed language at the school for police officers and the University of Curaçao is Dutch. The 
working language of the police and the Public Prosecutor’s Office is Dutch, and law is a profession 
where language is of the utmost importance. As a consequence, it has become more and more 
 
603
 5th Execution progress report Implementation plan Police Force Curaçao (5de Uitvoeringsrapportage 
Implementatieplan Korps Politie Curaçao), 9 October 2012. 
604
 Letter of the minister of the interior and kingdom affairs to the chair of parliament of the Netherlands, 7 
January 2013. 
605
 Annual report Landsrecherche 2012, Curacao April 2013, p.3. 
606
 Country ordinance Government accounts, 2010, No. 87, Article 39. 
607
 Security Plan Netherlands Antilles (Plan Veiligheid Nederlandse Antillen – PVNA).  
608
 Except Aruba.  
609
 Kingdom Act Public Prosecutors Offices, 2010, No. 336, Article 29.  
610
 Commission of experts, Assessment of government apparatus Curaçao and Sint Maarten, May 2010, 
p.27. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
105 
CURAÇAO 
 

620
(Landsverordening Materel Ambtenarenrecht) apply alongside the Legal Position Decree Police 
621
(RPB – Rechtspositie Besluit Politie) . The criteria are formulated in a rather generic manner, for 
example the civil servant needs to ‘behave decently’, pass a medical test, understand Dutch and 
also Papiamentu if the position requires.  
The procurator general and the advocate general are appointed by Kingdom Decree at the proposal 
of the ministers of justice of the three countries. The chief public prosecutor is also appointed by 
Kingdom Decree, but at the proposal of only the minister of justice of Curaçao. If a vacancy for 
procurator general and advocate general arises, the Joint Court of Justice and Public Prosecutor are 
 
invited to put forward a common, non-binding joint recommendation. The recommendation for the 
chief public prosecutor is made by the procurator general, who has heard the opinion of the 
622
Common Court. The other members of the Public Prosecutor’s Office are appointed by the 
623
minister of justice of Curaçao by country decree at the proposal of the procurator general. The 
criteria which much be met to become a public prosecutor are strict. A selection commission selects 
the candidates based on professional criteria for the ‘prosecutor’s training/education programme’ 
(Raio – Rechterlijke ambtenaar in opleiding). This is a six-year programme which an individual must 
complete successfully in order to become a public prosecutor. On the other hand, the legally-
prescribed criteria to appoint a public prosecutor are scarce, and those listed represent a set of 
formal qualifications rather than clear professional criteria. Public prosecutors shall be Dutch citizens 
who have a master’s degree in law. The law does prescribe which positions are incompatible with 
the office of public prosecutor; that is, governor, minister, member of a High Council of State, lawyer 
624
and notary.  
The procurator general can be suspended or dismissed by Kingdom Decree by the Council of 
625 626 627
Ministers of the Kingdom. The advocate general and the chief public prosecutor can be 
suspended or dismissed by Kingdom Decree via the ministers of justice of the three countries. The 
other members of the Public Prosecutor’s Office can be suspended or dismissed by the minister of 
628
justice of Curaçao at the recommendation of the procurator general. They can only be suspended 
629
or dismissed on precisely specified grounds. These limited grounds for suspension or dismissal 
prevent other parties, such as the Executive, from influencing the law enforcement by use of threat. 
Grounds for suspending or dismissing a public prosecutor include: proof that he/she is unfit for task, 
loss of Dutch nationality, detention, conviction for a crime, and bankruptcy. Because personnel of 
the Public Prosecutor’s Office are civil servants, the suspension and dismissal procedures from the 
630
country ordinance Legal and material rights and obligations of civil servants are also applicable.  
The police forces (Police Force Curaçao and the special police force) and the Public Prosecutor’s 
Office of Curaçao are the responsibility of the minister of justice of Curaçao. They have to account 
for their policy to the minister of justice. The four ministers of justice from the Kingdom do jointly 
propose policy programmes and accountability requirements, but each minister is responsible for the 
investigative activities in his own country. The procurator general exercises authority over criminal 
631
enforcement of the legal system by the Police Force Curaçao and the special police force.  
The powers of the police forces are anchored in the Kingdom Act Police and those of the Public 
632
Prosecutor’s Office are anchored in the Constitution and in the Kingdom Act Public Prosecutor’s 
 
620
 Country ordinance Legal and material rights and obligations of civil servants (Landsverordening 
materieel ambtenarenrecht), Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, Chapter II-III en Chapter IX.  
621
 Ibid, Article 3. 
622
 Kingdom Act Public Prosecutors Offices, 2010, No. 336, Article 16 and 17. 
623
 Ibid, Article 17.3. 
624
 Ibid, Article 18.3. 
625
 Ibid Article 24. 
626
 Ibid Article 16.1. 
627
 Ibid Article17.2.  
628
 Ibid, Article 17.3. 
629
 Ibid, Article 20-25. 
630
 Country ordinance Legal and material rights and obligations of civil servants, 2010, 87, Chapter IX. 
631
 Kingdom Act Public Prosecutors Offices, 2010, No. 336, Article 9. 
632
 Constitution, 2010, No. 86, Articles 105-108. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
107 
CURAÇAO 
 

country is able to keep sufficient distance from the political arena. According to others there are, in 
639
practice, sufficient safeguards in the Kingdom Act.  
In recent years, the independence of the Public Prosecutor’s Office Curaçao has been called into 
question a few times. For example, in 2012 some members of the Parliament of Curaçao proposed 
640
a Parliamentary Enquiry into the research methods of the Public Prosecutor’s Office Curaçao. In 
641
the same period, an increase in the number of ‘politically sensitive reports’ was registered. It has 
been suggested that cases reported by supporters of some political parties received more 
favourable treatment than those reported by supporters of other parties or by ordinary citizens. 
Because the Public Prosecutor’s Office Curaçao aims to prevent any perception of impartially, it 
642
introduced an instruction regarding ‘politically sensitive reports’. A special commision with, 
amongst others, the advocate general and the head of the special police force, aims to achieve 
objective decisions according to criteria in the instruction. There are no indications of undue 
influence in the decisions of the commission. 
Examples of undue external interference in judicial proceedings are rare, but in 2012 the minister of 
justice of Curaçao intervened in an on-going criminal investigation, the ‘Bientu-investigation’. 
643
Although strict rules apply to prevent interference in a criminal investigation, on 25 April 2012 the 
minister of justice submitted an official request to the American minister of foreign affairs to lift the 
seizure of US bank balances of a Curaçao lottery owner, half-brother of the then minister of finance. 
Those seizures were made at the request of the Public Prosecutor’s Office in Curaçao, who, until 
the minister of justice withdrew the delegation (mandate) of his authority to ask the United States for 
legal assistance, was the relevant authority to do so and had been for more than 20 years. The 
issue led to questions from the United States to the Dutch government and was eventually settled 
with a letter from the Dutch Minister of Foreign Affairs to the authorities in the United States, also on 
behalf of the Curaçao government, underscoring that all countries within the Kingdom of the 
644
Netherlands should respect the separation of powers. As far as we could determine in this 
assessment, the mandate is still not returned to the procurator general and there are as yet no 
645
guarantees created to prevent recurrence. 
Another example of undue influence concerns the appointment of attorneys at law representing the 
646
State (Landsadvocaat) in civil and other cases against the State. Since 1986 the advocate 
general had been authorised to select legal representatives to represent the State, to prevent 
647
conflicts of interest at the expense of the State and the State budget. However, the first cabinet of 
Curaçao, Cabinet-Schotte (2010-2012) withdrew this authority from the advocate general, and 
became directly responsible for selection. Cabinet-Hodge broke some of the contracts concluded 
earlier, but as yet has not re-authorised the advocate general to select its legal representatives.  
 
639
 Kingdom Act Public Prosecutors Offices, Article 13.1 and 13.2. 
640
 ‘Proces parlementaire Questionnaire starts’ (Proces Parlementaire Enquête in gang gezet), Amigoe 15 
May 2012. See also Onduidelijkheid over parlementaire enquête 25 May 2012 via www.versgeperst.com. 
641
 For example, Public Prosecutor’s Office credibility is questioned (Geloofwaardigheid OM staat ter 
discussie, Van der Dijs doet aangifte tegen Leeflang), Amigoe 21 April 2012, Ivar Asjes doet aangifte, 
Amigoe 30 Juni 2012. 
642
 ‘Commission for political reports’ (Commissie voor politiek gevoelige aangiften) 18 November 2012 via 
www.versgeperst.com [accessed 15 February 2013]. 
643
 Kingdom Act Public Prosecutors Offices, 2010, No. 336, Articles 13.2. The Treaty between the US and 
the Kingdom says that the minister of justice is the central authority for mutual legal assistance requests. 
That had been mandated to the procurator general but such a mandate may be revoked, it did. 
644
 http://knipselkrantCuraçao.wordpress.com (Punt achter omstreden brief minister Wilsoe) September 
2012 [accessed 12 March 2013].  
645
 Information Public Prosecutor’s Office, 13 May 2013. 
646
 Strictly speaking, there is no ‘State Attorney’. The country selects a lawyer to act in a particular case 
on behalf of the country. 
647
 As recommended in: Commission of experts, Assessment of government apparatus Curacao and Sint 
Maarten, 2012, p 29. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
109 
CURAÇAO 
 

Transparency (practice) 
Score: 50  
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THERE TRANSPARENCY IN THE ACTIVITIES AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES OF LAW 
ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES IN PRACTICE? 
 
Although law enforcement agencies do inform the public about criminality, they are less 
transparent about their procedures and policies. On the other hand, the openness of the 
Public Prosecutor’s Office regarding its organisation and management is increasing.  
The police do inform the public about criminality, as long it does not interfere with the investigation. 
The police press officer communicates daily via radio and television about cases and developments 
in on-going investigations. Relevant information is shared, as far as it does not harm investigations. 
In addition, several newspapers also report on police activities, partly based on information provided 
to the police radio.  
On the other hand, as for the Police Force Curaçao, it is certainly not the case that the general 
public has easy access to information on the organisation and functioning of the police forces. For 
example, it is not easy for crime victims to find out how and where they can file a report. There is no 
website, nor a Facebook page or other easy means of access. Accessibility by phone is not always 
guaranteed.  
On the positive side, the public can readily obtain basic relevant information on the organisation and 
functioning of the Public Prosecutor’s Office. The Office has a website, which was launched in 
February 2013. This contains a broad range of information on, for example, the structure of the 
Public Prosecutor’s Office, information about the offices in the different countries of the Kingdom, 
653
publications and news. The Office also has a Facebook page to keep the public informed of 
recent cases and verdicts, and this also provides for a low threshold to contact the Public 
Prosecutor. Another positive development to be mentioned is the proactive attitude of the 
spokesman of the Public Prosecutor’s Office. Moreover, in 2013 the Public Prosecutor’s Office 
organised training for journalists to inform them about the Penal Code, and the procedures and 
654
specific role of the Office. 
The annual report of the Public Prosecutor’s Office contains information on operational 
management, statistics on reports, type of cases and verdicts. Unfortunately the annual report so far 
has never been ready within the prescribed timeframe (April of the following year). According to 
those interviewed, the annual report of 2011 is still not approved by the ministers of justice, while 
655
this is required by the Kingdom Act. The reports are available for those interested, but are not 
(yet) published on the Office’s Facebook page or its website. The 2011 annual report of the Public 
Prosecutor’s Office can, however, be found on internet sites. The Public Prosecutor’s Office usually 
also makes public through different media information on judicial appointments, dismissals and 
transfers.  
656
In recent years, two analyses about the crime situation in Curaçao were published. These contain 
both quantitative and qualitative information about several crimes, and are available for those 
 
653
 See www.openbaarministerie.org [accessed 11 March 2013]. 
654
 Training journalists Public Prosecutor’s Office Curaçao, (Geslaagde ‘opfriscursus’ OM journalisten 
Curacao), 4 June 2013, via www.dutchcaribbeanlegalportal.com. 
655
 Kingdom Act Public Prosecutors Offices, 2010, No. 336, Article 31. 
656
 W. Faber et al, Baseline study, Criminality and law enforcement Curaçao and Bonaire (Baselinestudy. 
Criminaliteit en rechtshandhaving Curaçao en Bonaire) (Oss/Amsterdam: Faber Organisatievernieuwing 
BV/Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, June 2007) and KLPD, Crime analyses of Curaçao 2008 
(Criminaliteitsbeeld analyse van Curaçao 2008) (Zoetermeer: Korps Landelijke Politiediensten, Dienst 
IPOL, 2009). 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
111 
CURAÇAO 
 

Accountability (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DO LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES HAVE TO REPORT AND BE ANSWERABLE FOR THEIR 
ACTIONS IN PRACTICE? 
 
Accountability of law enforcement officers is not ensured adequately in practice. The status 
of complaints procedures for the police is unclear and the right of victims to receive 
information about the follow up of ‘their’ case is not always respected. The existing 
provisions are not effective in practice. 
According to those interviewed, at the time of writing of this report, the country ordinance Complaints 
committee policing actions (Landsverordening Klachtencommissie Politieel Optreden) from the 
666
Netherlands Antilles is still used. We could not confirm in this assessment if a new complaints 
667
ordinance for Curaçao is in the making. We couldn’t determine whether a complaints procedure 
already exists for the Police Force Curaçao, while the special police force stated it does not yet have 
a complaints procedure. 
The Law Enforcement Council has stressed the importance of the introduction of a complaints 
procedure regarding the reporting process, to get a better idea of the needs of citizens and the 
668
performance of the police. In addition, according to the Law Enforcement Council, the requirement 
to inform those who reported a case (and have indicated that they want to be informed about its 
669
follow up) is often not followed by regular police forces, that is, district teams. According to 
research into the police organisation, conducted in 2008, law enforcement agencies do have several 
procedures to report and be answerable for some actions, but the existing provisions are not always 
670
applied effectively in practice.  
On the positive side, public prosecutors do give reasons for their actions and decisions in practice. 
However, according to one expert, if the reasons for the actions and decisions of the public 
prosecutors are poor and not well sustained, there are often no consequences. As noted above, 
complaints can be submitted to the Public Prosecutor’s Office, but procedures are often not known 
by the public. According to those interviewed, the Public Prosecutor’s Office has not received any 
official complaints since the change in the constitutional relations. To date, no complaints advisory 
bodies have been installed. Citizens have, however, filed a few complaints regarding the police with 
671
the Ombudsman. In 2010 the Ombudsman received three complaints about the police and six in 
672 673
2011 . The Court of Appeal receives about 10 complaints of non-prosecution a year and has by 
law the authority to give instruction to the Public Prosecutor for further prosecution. Those 
complaints generally do not apply to corruption cases.  
 
 
 
 
666
 Country ordinance, 1994, compliant procedure (Procedurehoudende instelling van een 
klachtencommissie met betrekking tot het optreden van politieambtenaren). 
667
 Implementation plan KPC, Intake & Service p.20 
668
 Law Enforcement Council, The reporting process on Curaçao, Inspection report of the Law 
Enforcement Council, May 2012, p.10. 
669
 Ibid, p.7. 
670
 Now or Never, Police Netherlands Antilles, (Nu of Nooit, Naar een verbeterplan voor de politiekorpsen 
op de Nederlandse Antillen), Rotterdam, March 2008. 
671
 Annual Report Ombudsman 2010, p.22. 
672
 Annual Report Ombudsman 2011, p.16. 
673
 Country ordinance, Code of Criminal Procedure, 2010, No. 86 and 87, Article 15.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
113 
CURAÇAO 
 

Integrity (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE INTEGRITY OF MEMBERS OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES ENSURED IN PRACTICE? 
 
The integrity rules for law enforcement officers are numerous and can become confusing. 
The police forces and the Public Prosecutor’s Office did undertake some activities to ensure 
its integrity. The Public Prosecutor’s Office investigates and santions integrity breaches. Due 
to lack of information about the Police Force Curaçao we couldn’t determine its practice on 
integrity.  
In practice, the Police Force Curaçao indicates that it has a code of conduct and pays attention to 
integrity issues, for instance by organising training. The Training Institute for Law Enforcement and 
Safety Concerns (Opleidingsinstituut voor Rechtshandhaving en Veiligheidszorg) provided training 
682
on the code of conduct and integrity for members of the judicial chain in April 2011. Furthermore, 
in 2010 workshops for managing integrity were provided for managers. However, due to a lack of 
sufficient information in this assessment about the integrity policy of the Police Force Curaçao, we 
couldn’t determine if, for instance, the code of conduct is applied in practice.  
Experts from outside the Public Prosecutor’s Office have the impression that, overall, public 
prosecutors are highly professional, very thoughtful/careful and ethically aware. However, the 
independence and integrity of public prosecutors has also come under scrutiny in recent years. The 
fact that there are no regulations restricting post-government private sector employment for public 
prosecutors recently gave rise to some integrity concerns when a former public prosecutor, 
employed for more than 10 years at the Office in Curaçao, became an attorney at law in the private 
sector immediately after his retirement from office.  
The additional functions and activities of public prosecutors are registered in practice, but their 
accessibility for perusal at the Parket PG and the Public Prosecutor’s Office was not confirmed 
during this assessment. 
The Public Prosecutor’s Office introduced a code of conduct in 2010 and organised training on the 
introduction of the code. Breaches of the code are investigated and sanctioned, and the self-
regulating mechanism is considered to work well. On the downside, because the rules regarding 
integrity, as found in the Kingdom Act and those relevant to civil servants, as well as those in the 
code of conduct apply to the public prosecutor, it is complicated and confusing to handle integrity 
issues in practice. 
Although those to be employed at the police and the Public Prosecutor’s Office are to take an 
oath/pledge, in practice, this is not always the case. 
 
 
 
 
 
682
 See also: Caribbean Action Taskforce (CFATF), Mutual evaluation report Curaçao, 25 June 2012. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
115 
CURAÇAO 
 

There is no overview available which shows the total number and type of investigations carried out. 
There are no regular and comprehensive statistics on criminal corruption cases, and the annual 
686
reports of the Public Prosecutor’s Office do not provide an insight into the number of corruption 
convictions. The registration of corruption requires additional administrative steps to be taken; these 
offences are currently registered under a more general category of crime.  
The special police force registered 16 investigations into integrity issues of civil servants in 2012, of 
687
which only one was a bribery case. It is believed that not all cases of bribery are reported to the 
688
police or the Public Prosecutor’s Office. Although there is a legal duty for civil servants to report 
immediately a crime they become aware of while carrying out their job, in practice this is rarely done.  
Those interviewed in this assessment considered the total number of corruption cases and 
convictions to be low. Preliminary findings of an academic study show about 10 corruption cases 
689
under appeal between 2008 and 2011 in Curaçao. (See also Chapter V. Corruption Profile.) 
 
 
 
 
686
 Annual report 2011, Public Prosecutor’s Office. 
687
 Annual report Landsrecherche, 2012, p.9.  
688
 Country ordinance Legal and material rights and obligations of civil servants, Article 86. 
689
 P.C.M. Schotborgh-van de Ven, PhD study in process, The causes of fraud and corruption in the 
Dutch Caribbean. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
117 
CURAÇAO 
 

electoral council’s tasks as supervisor of political party financing. However, the Electoral Code does 
require the minister to cover some of the electoral council’s costs. For instance, the minister 
693
provides the electoral council with an office in which to convene. (Also refer to the section on 
Independence.)  
In practice, during the last elections of October 2012, the electoral council was responsible for the 
full budget for the administration of the elections, made available by the minister on the basis of a 
draft budget handed in by the electoral council. This budget covered expenses related to 
communication, security, mailing of voter registration cards, voting ballots and financial 
694
compensation for members of the polling stations. The budget was considered to be sufficient to 
perform the electoral council’s tasks during the last election. The electoral council is not provided 
with additional budget required to perform its tasks related to the financing of political parties.  
Regular personnel costs are not included in the budget made available, and the electoral council is 
to make use of the services provided by several administrative bodies, such as the Civil Registry 
(Kranshi), and, with respect to the monitoring of the financing of political parties, the administration’s 
internal auditor (SOAB – Stichting Overheidsaccountantsbureau). Members of the electoral council 
themselves do not receive any remuneration for their work nor reimbursement of expenses, and 
695
they regard their work as ‘an honourable activity to serve the country’. However, the electoral 
council is allowed to contract additional personnel when needed, such as catering staff or additional 
security.  
Up to now these arrangements are considered to have been sufficient for the electoral council to 
perform its tasks adequately, although the lack of reimbursement of expenses of its members 
implies that, in practice, members themselves cover part of the costs involved. Moreover, 
international observers considered positively the quality of the Civil Registry, and reported that 
696
officers and members of the polling stations were well acquainted with their respective tasks.  
 
Independence (law) 
 
Score: 25 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE ELECTORAL MANAGEMENT BODY INDEPENDENT BY LAW? 
 
The Electoral Code contains insufficient safeguards for the independence and impartiality of 
the electoral council, although it does clearly define its powers.  
The position of the electoral council is not anchored in the Constitution, but in the Electoral Code, 
which can be amended only with the approval of both Parliament and government. This Code also 
defines the respective responsibilities of the government and the minister in the system of electoral 
697
administration.  
Pursuant to the Electoral Code, the government is responsible for the division of Curaçao into 
electoral districts, the designation of premises for the supporting of lists of candidates, the drafting 
and set up of several forms, as well as for regulations related to the decision-making of the electoral 
 
693
 Ibid., Articles 13, 41, 48, 54. 
694
 Cf. Electoral Decree Curaçao (Kiesbesluit Curaçao), Country Gazette 2012, No.56, general part of the 
explanatory memorandum, under ‘Financial consequences’ (Financiële consequenties).  
695
 www.kse.cw [accessed 1 March 2013]. 
696
 ‘Report of the international observers, Parliament elections held on Friday October 19, 2012, in 
Curaçao’ via www.kse.cw [accessed 3 March 2013]. Also Commission of experts, Assessment of 
government apparatus Curaçao and Sint Maarten (Toetsing overheidsheidsapparaten Curaçao en Sint 
Maarten) (s.l.: Commission of experts, May 2010), p.49.  
697
 Constitution of Curaçao (Staatsregeling van Curaçao), Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, No.86, Article 
38. Cf. Electoral Decree, general part of explanatory memorandum.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
119 
CURAÇAO 
 

The composition of the electoral council appointed by the outgoing government prior to the elections 
of October 2012 was widely considered to be balanced. Other than the chairperson, who was 
approached by the minister of administration, planning and service, its members were selected by 
the chair himself, taking into account selection criteria such as expertise in legal, technical and 
financial aspects as well as integrity and impartiality.  
The electoral council is also considered to have operated in a professional and non-partisan 
manner. Thus, for example, it underscored its non-partisanship in its public presentations, stating it 
‘would not talk about political parties, but [only] on the organisation [of the electoral process] before, 
during and after elections’. Members of the electoral council were not allowed to appear in public 
with any kind of party symbol, and wore uniform shirts on election day. There are also no reports of 
705
members making partisan statements or engaging in partisan activities.  
Also, prior to the elections of October 2012, the interim minister of the then interim government 
responsible for the elections mandated the electoral council to send out voter registration cards and 
provide for the establishment of polling stations and ballot papers. It was also mandated to ensure 
706
the safekeeping of ballot boxes and papers in case of suspension of the voting process. In his 
statement, the minister underscored his intention to enable the electoral council to operate as 
independently as possible, and ‘to minimize all possible intentions from the administration to have 
707
anything to do with the whole electoral process’. In practice, this implied that the electoral council 
was responsible for the whole electoral process, including the selection and training of members of 
the supporting and polling stations. There were no reports of undue interference in the activities of 
708
the electoral council and the stations.  
 
Governance 
 
 
Transparency (law) 
 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE PROVISIONS IN PLACE TO ENSURE THAT THE PUBLIC CAN OBTAIN RELEVANT 
INFORMATION ON THE ACTIVITIES AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES OF THE ELECTORAL MANAGEMENT 
BODY? 
 
The Electoral Code contains many provisions to ensure public access to the activities and 
the decision-making processes of the electoral council, although transparency could be 
increased if all formal reports were required to be made public. There are, however, no 
provisions for transparency of the electoral council’s work related to the financing of political 
groups.  
The Electoral Code contains several important provisions to make public information on the activities 
and decisions of the electoral council. Thus, of course, it is required to officially publish its formal 
statement of all candidates elected as well as its decree on the election results. The electoral council 
has to deposit these documents at the Civil Registry for public inspection and announce these 
709
deposits publicly. The announcement of the final election results is also open to voters. The 
 
705
 See for example ‘Information session Electoral Management Board’ (Informatieavond 
Hoofdstembureau), 12 October 2012 via www.versgeperst.com [accessed 6 March 2013]. 
706
 Ministerial Decree of 16 October 2012 of the minister of administration, planning and service, no. 
2012/62264. Cf. Electoral Code, Articles 41, 48, 54 and 73. 
707
 ‘Government interference elections minimized’ (Overheidsbemoeienis verkiezingen geminimaliseerd), 
16 October 2012 via www.versgeperst.com [accessed 6 March 2013]. 
708
 www.kse.cw [accessed 6 March 2013]. 
709
 Electoral Code, Articles 93, 104 and 105. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
121 
CURAÇAO 
 

voter registration card. How and where can I get it in time?’ and information on how to cast a valid 
vote. It also provides some statistical information on those eligible to vote as well as detailed results 
of the last elections of October 2012, including the report of the international observers. In addition, 
the website contains results of previous elections and referenda, going back to 1993. 
However, the website does not provide access to any of the formal reports, such as the reports 
required to be deposited at the Civil Registry. It also does not contain any information on its activities 
related to the financing of political groups. As far as could be assessed, the electoral council does 
not make such information available through other means.  
 
Accountability (law) 
 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE PROVISIONS IN PLACE TO ENSURE THAT THE ELECTORAL MANAGEMENT BOARD 
HAS TO REPORT AND BE ANSWERABLE FOR ITS ACTIONS? 
 
The Electoral Code contains several provisions to hold the electoral council accountable for 
its actions related to the electoral process, although it is not required to present a 
comprehensive report once the elections are over. Legal redress is also possible. There are, 
however, no requirements to hold the electoral council accountable for the execution of its 
tasks related to the financing of political groups. 
The electoral council and the supporting/polling stations must, as already mentioned in the above, 
719
formally report on all their meetings required to be held by law (processen-verbaal). In some 
cases, objections put forward by voters are also to be included in the reports, such as in the reports 
on of the supporting and polling stations on supporting and election day, or in the electoral council’s 
720
reports on its meetings to determine and report the election results. The latter, as well as the 
reports of the polling stations, are also required to be sent to Parliament, together with the electoral 
721
council’s formal statement of all candidates chosen as well as its decree on the election results. 
However, no time frame is specified for the submission of the reports, and the electoral council is not 
required to submit a comprehensive report or evaluation of the electoral process after the elections. 
The Electoral Code does not contain any other requirements as to the contents of the formal reports, 
but their precise formats are prescribed in detail in the Electoral Decree.  
Legal redress is also provided for. Appeal – again, by voters – against a decision of the electoral 
council prior to the elections may concern, for example, its assessment regarding whether or not a 
list of candidates satisfies all requirements to enter an election. Proceedings are to be instituted 
722
before the Court of First Instance. Appeal against the decision of that court is not possible. The 
Electoral Code does not contain specific provisions to appeal its decisions related to the outcome of 
the election. However, such appeal is possible. Because decisions of the electoral council and the 
supporting and polling stations are not considered administrative law, these proceedings are to be 
723
based on the Civil Code. Note also that the Electoral Code allows for the possibility of recounts 
prior to legal proceedings. Thus, the electoral council can decide – on its own initiative but also in 
724
response to a voter request – to conduct a recount of votes for one or more polling stations.  
 
719
 Electoral Code, Articles 25, 27, 33, 46, 84, 90 and 104. Also Articles 91 and 93. 
720
 See, for example, Electoral Code, Articles 21, 68, 81 and 82 as well as Articles 89 and 104. 
721
 Ibid., Article 106. The reports of the supporting stations are not required to be sent to parliament. 
722
 Ibid., Articles 30 to 32. 
723
 Ibid., explanatory memorandum to Articles 86 to 106. Cf. Country ordinance Administrative law 
(Landsverordening Administratieve rechtspraak), Country Gazette 2006, No.71, Article 2.  
724
 Electoral Code, Article 88. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
123 
CURAÇAO 
 

Although the explanatory memorandum of the Electoral Code does make reference to the need for 
the appointment of people with integrity, the code does not contain any specific provisions to ensure 
the electoral council’s integrity, nor the integrity of members of the supporting and polling stations. 
As reported in the above, it has yet to be adapted to comply with the 2010 recommendation to 
include more safeguards ‘to ensure the[ir] independence, integrity and impartiality’. Also, because 
members appointed to the electoral council fall outside the scope of the civil servants regulations, 
the general integrity rules applicable to civil servants do not apply, and the electoral council does not 
have a separate code of conduct. At the moment, then, there are no specific regulations related to 
the selection of candidates or the integrity of their activities once appointed, such as restrictions on 
additional functions, rules on gifts or conflicting interests. 
However, there are some safeguards built into the Electoral Code itself, because the code and 
delegated legislation detail how the electoral process is to proceed. Also, civil servants involved in 
the electoral process, such as those employed at the Civil Registry, have to comply with the general 
integrity rules for civil servants (also refer to Chapter VII.4 Public Sector). In addition, the Penal 
Code contains several provisions which may also safeguard the integrity of the activities of the 
members of the electoral council and the supporting and polling stations. Thus, for example, it is a 
criminal offence to tamper with ballots cast and engage in fraudulent acts which lead to different 
727
election results than would have been the result of votes cast legally.  
 
Integrity mechanisms (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE INTEGRITY OF THE ELECTORAL MANAGEMENT BODY ENSURED IN PRACTICE? 
 
In the absence of integrity rules and codes, no comprehensive approach to ensure the 
integrity of the electoral council exists and it is difficult to assess to what extent its integrity 
and that of the supporting and polling stations is ensured in practice. However, their integrity 
has not been questioned.  
In light of the lack of legal provisions in place to ensure the integrity of the electoral council, it is 
difficult to assess to what extent its integrity and that of the supporting and polling stations is 
ensured in practice. However, according to one expert, while screening is not legally required, those 
engaged in the election process are in practice screened by the electoral council. In addition, the 
openness of the election process, allowing voters, political observers and international observers to 
scrutinise all activities, is said to provide for valuable checks and balances in practice. Also, it should 
be noted that integrity of the electoral council’s current members has never been questioned, and 
there have been no reports of integrity breaches of supporting and polling stations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
727
 Penal Code, Book 2, Title IV, Articles 2:45 and 2:47. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
125 
CURAÇAO 
 

to deposit the validated lists at the Civil Registry for public inspection, inform those who handed in 
732
the lists of the omissions noted, and allow some three days for them to correct those omissions. In 
addition, once the electoral council has decided on the validity of the lists, its decision may be 
733
appealed. (Also refer to the sections on Transparency and Accountability.) 
In practice, in the run-up to the elections, some problems were reported, mainly due to the fact that 
there was relatively little time to prepare for the elections. Thus, for example, at least one person 
who would have liked to have been put up for nomination, was not able to do so because he was not 
734
registered in the electoral register in time. However, in general the registration of persons eligible 
to vote was considered to be practical and effective during the last elections, and international 
735
observers – invited to the elections by the interim government – saw ‘no persons who objected to 
not being in the voter’s registry’. The electoral council also took a number of steps beforehand to 
ensure the integrity of the electoral process. For example, it organised informative sessions for the 
public on its activities, provided information for those who didn’t receive or lost their voter registration 
card on how to replace it, and produced information leaflets in both Papiamentu and Dutch on the 
upcoming elections and voting process. It also sent out several press notices to inform voters 
through the different media on the upcoming election.  
And although, as discussed elsewhere in this assessment, the run-up to the elections was far from 
quiet, the voting process itself was also generally assessed positively. (Also refer to Chapters VII.1 
Legislature and VII.2 Executive.) International observers reported that ‘[o]ne could see the integrity 
736
of the process in general’. Voters, parties and formal observers were allowed access to observe 
all stages, from polling to counting to result aggregations. Sensitive electoral materials such as 
ballots appeared tamper-proof and accounted for, albeit that – again due to the short preparation 
time available – there were reports of two misprints and the ballot boxes did not satisfy the detailed 
737
requirements of the Electoral Code. The voting process was reported to be conducted in an 
orderly manner, even though voters in some polling stations were confronted with long queues. 
Facilities, including those for physically disabled voters, were good. Although there were no reports 
of voters not able to vote, the observers did recommend that a reallocation of voters to different 
polling stations should be considered as soon as possible, and, if possible, increase the total 
738
number of polling stations.  
On the negative side, in the period just before and after the October 2012 elections, some labelled 
the general atmosphere as ‘grim’, referring to reports of the destruction of campaign materials, 
739
verbal abuses and some reports of intimidation. Also, there were persistent allegations similar to 
those of 2010, of buying votes, and promising money, laptops and Blackberries for a photo taken 
from the ballot booth. The electoral council issued a disciplinary regulation (ordemaatregel) and 
ruled that, although it was not forbidden to enter the polling station with a mobile phone, no one was 
740
allowed to use it ‘for communication or to take a picture in the polling station’. It remained unclear 
to what extent it was also possible to levy sanctions in case of non-compliance, and how to 
 
732
 Electoral Code, Articles 25 and 26.  
733
 Ibid., Article 30.  
734
 ‘Shortened closure time for electoral registration affects Osepa’, 22 August 2012, via 
www.curacaochoronicle.com [accessed 17 March 2013]. 
735
 Cf. Answer to questions of member Van Dam (PvdA) to the minister of the interior and kingdom 
relations on irregularities during the elections on Curaçao, received 9 October 2012 (Antwoord op vragen 
van het lid Van Dam (PvdA) aan de Minister van Binnenlandse Zaken en Koninkrijksrelaties over 
onregelmatigheden bij de verkiezingen op Curaçao, ontvangen 9 oktober 2012), Dutch House of 
Representatives, Parliamentary Year 2012-2013, Annex to the Proceedings, 240. 
736
 ‘Report of the international observers, Parliament elections held on Friday October 19, 2012, in 
Curaçao’, www.kse.cw [accessed 3 March 2013].  
737
 On this, see Electoral Decree, general part.  
738
 Report of the international observers.  
739
 See on this, for example, ‘VBC: intimidation is not acceptable’ (VBC: intimidatie is onacceptabel), 9 
October 2012 via www.versgeperst.com; ‘FOL: political threats and destruction escalating’ (FOL: politieke 
bedreiging en vernieling lopen de spuigaten uit), 8 October 2012 via www.kkcuracao.com [accessed 20 
May 2013]. 
740
 Electoral council information brochure, via www.ksw.cw [accessed 5 March 2013]. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
127 
CURAÇAO 
 

VII.7 OMBUDSMAN 
STRUCTURE AND ORGANISATION 
Under the Constitution (Staatsregeling), the Ombudsman is a High Council of State appointed by 
742
Parliament, which can use its findings for its scrutiny of the Executive. The powers and 
743
responsibilities of the Ombudsman are detailed in the country ordinance Ombudsman. The 
Ombudsman is authorised to investigate, on request or on his/her own initiative, the way in which an 
744
administrative body behaved towards a natural or legal person, report on his/her findings and 
judgment as to whether or not the conduct of the administrative body was fully or partially 
745
appropriate, and may offer recommendations to take measures. An office is provided to enable 
746
the Ombudsman to carry out his/her work, . The first Ombudsman – then Ombudsfunktionaris – 
747
was appointed in 2003. 
 
ASSESSMENT 
 
Capacity 
 
Resources (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DOES THE OMBUDSMAN HAVE ADEQUATE RESOURCES TO ACHIEVE HIS/HER GOALS IN 
PRACTICE? 
 
The Ombudsman usually receives adequate state funding, but recent budget cutbacks and 
procedural delays have made it more difficult for the Ombudsman to effectively perform 
his/her tasks. Also, attracting and keeping adequately equipped personnel remains a cause 
of concern.  
The budget proposals of the Ombudsman’s office are usually approved by Parliament without 
amendments or cutbacks and are said to have been sufficient, broadly speaking, to achieve the 
748
Ombudsman’s goals. However, the recent instruction to the Curaçao government to balance its 
 
742
 Constitution of Curaçao (Staatsregeling van Curaçao), Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, No. 86, Article 
71. 
743
 Country ordinance Ombudsman, Appendix r, Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, No. 87, Article 27 and the 
explanatory memorandum. Also: Constitution, Article 71.5. 
744
 Constitution, Article 71.2. Country ordinance Ombudsman, Article 12.5, with the exceptions mentioned 
in Articles 14 and 15. 
745
 Country ordinance Ombudsman, Article 25.  
746
 Ibid, Article 10.1.  
747
 A similar function, the ombudsfunktionaris, was already called into existence in 2001, in the Island 
Territory Ombudsman Act. The first ombudsfunktionaris was appointed by the Executive Council 
(Bestuurscollege) in 2003. Its office became operational in August 2004. See Ombudsman van Curaçao, 
Annual Report 2010 (Curaçao: Ombudsman van Curaçao, December 2011), p.37. 
748
See, for example, Ombudsman van Curaçao, December 2011:30. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
129 
CURAÇAO 
 

757
six years, and is only eligible once for reappointment. However, there are no specific regulations 
stipulating that the recruitment of the Ombudsman and his/her staff is to be based on clear 
professional criteria. 
758
The Ombudsman can only be suspended or dismissed by Parliament. Again, a regular majority 
suffices. The law’s list of legitimate reasons for suspension or early dismissal is short, specific and 
reasonable and includes a criminal conviction, placement under supervision, and suspension of 
759
payment. Reasons for dismissal also include a situation in which the Ombudsman takes on a role 
which the law declares to be incompatible with the position of Ombudsman, such as a member of a 
permanent government advisory body, a solicitor, prosecutor or notary, or board member of a 
760
political party. On the negative side, the Ombudsman and his/her staff do not enjoy explicit legal 
protection. (Also refer to the section on Accountability below.) 
The Ombudsman has the power to determine the operational rules and the structure of the 
761
Ombudsman’s office. With the change in constitutional arrangements and the positioning as High 
Council of State, a further safeguard for independence was added. The Ombudsman is now similar 
to, for example, the Court of Audit and Parliament, competent to manage his/her own personnel, 
although in practice no own personnel have been contracted yet, and personnel may still opt to be 
762
appointed as civil servants. Also, each year, the Ombudsman is to hand in his/her budget 
proposal to the Minister of Finance. The latter, after approval of the Council of Ministers, may amend 
the proposal in the overall budget sent to Parliament, but is required to mention the Ombudsman’s 
763
budget proposal in the explanatory memorandum to the budget. Moreover, within the budget thus 
allocated, the Ombudsman, again similar to other High Councils of State, is now authorised to 
764
manage his/her own budget. 
With the change in constitutional arrangements, the salary of the Ombudsman is to be regulated by 
765
country ordinance. The Ombudsman’s pension is set equal to the pension of a member of 
766
Parliament. Other rights and duties regarding terms of employment are to be regulated by country 
decree, and also used to be comparable to that of a member of Parliament. However, as yet, both 
country ordinance and decree have not been enacted, and in practice the Ombudsman’s salary now 
767
lags behind.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
757
 Country ordinance Ombudsman, Article 3. 
758
 Constitution, Article 71.4; Country ordinance Ombudsman, Article 4. 
759
 Country ordinance Ombudsman, Articles 4 and 5. 
760
 Ibid., Articles 4 and 6. The Constitution also rules out membership of Parliament and government. The 
Kingdom Act Financial Supervision Curaçao and Sint Maarten rules out membership of the Board of 
Financial Supervision. 
761
 Country ordinance Ombudsman, Article10.2. 
762
 Ibid., Article 10.3 and Article 11; also refer to the explanatory memorandum on Article 10. Also: 
information received from the Ombudsman, 28 January 2013.  
763
 Country ordinance Ombudsman, Article 11.2; Country ordinance Government accounts 2010 
(Landsverordening Comptabliteit 2010), Official Curaçao Gazette, No.87, Appendix b, Chapter 4, 
especially Articles 34, 38 and 39 and the explanatory memorandum. 
764
 Country ordinance Ombudsman, Article 11.1; Country ordinance Government accounts 2010, Article 
39.3. 
765
 Country ordinance Ombudsman, Article 7.1. 
766
 Ibid., Article 7.2. 
767
 Ombudsman of Curaçao, 2011:29; Ombudsman of Curaçao, 2012:35. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
131 
CURAÇAO 
 

Governance 
 
Transparency (law) 
Score: 75 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE PROVISIONS IN PLACE TO ENSURE THAT THE PUBLIC CAN OBTAIN INFORMATION 
ON THE RELEVANT ACTIVITIES AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES OF THE OMBUDSMAN? 
 
 
The Ombudsman has a duty to make information about his/her activities public, but there are 
only limited provisions that would require the Ombudsman proactively to release different 
types of information to the general public between annual reports.  
The Ombudsman is to provide anyone who makes a request to that end with a copy of or an extract 
from his/her report. The Ombudsman is also required to deposit a copy of his/her reports for public 
773
inspection at a location to be indicated by the Ombudsman. In case the Ombudsman does not 
follow up on a petition to start an investigation, or does not continue the investigation, the 
774
announcement of this is to be made public in a similar manner. Also, the Ombudsman must 
submit an annual report of his/her activities to Parliament, including information on the previous 
year’s revenue and expenditure. S/he is also to ensure that this report – barring data to be 
775
communicated as confidential information to Parliament – is made public and generally 
776
available. 
The explanatory memorandum to the country ordinance underlines the importance of transparency, 
stating among other things that the Ombudsman ‘is to pass judgment in a public report’ and  ‘shall 
777
perform his duties with the highest degree of disclosure possible’. However, specific regulations to 
that effect do not exist. For example, the law does not contain a duty to maintain a public register of 
all complaints, reports and announcements, which limits the effectiveness of the transparency 
provisions that are included. The law also does not mention any time limits for the documents or 
reports to be made public, nor does it contain a duty for the Ombudsman to proactively publicise 
information. Also, there are no regulations concerning involvement of the public in activities of the 
Ombudsman. The latter – for example the advice committee mentioned in the above – did exist 
778
earlier, but were not included in the new ordinance.  
779
The Ombudsman is required to make his/her additional functions public.  
 
Transparency (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THERE TRANSPARENCY IN THE ACTIVITIES AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES OF THE 
OMBUDSMAN IN PRACTICE? 
 
 
773
 Ibid., Article 25.6. 
774
 Ibid., Article 16.2. 
775
 Ibid., Article 27.3; Cf. items that fit the requirements as listed in Article 11 of the Act on public access to 
government information (Landsverordening openbaarheid van bestuur), Appendix t, Official Curaçao 
Gazette 2010, No. 87.  
776
 Country ordinance Ombudsman, Article 27. Also refer to Article 11. 
777
 Ibid., explanatory memorandum, general part. 
778
 Island ordinance Ombudsman official Curaçao (Eilandsverordening Ombudsfunktionaris Curaçao), 
Official Curaçao Gazette 2011, No.69, Article 8.  
779
 Country ordinance Ombudsman, Article 6.4.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
133 
CURAÇAO 
 

The Ombudsman is required to report annually to Parliament, and Parliament may request the 
784
Ombudsman to provide further information to or in Parliament. With regard to his/her financial 
management the Ombudsman is required to account through the regular Curaçao accountability 
785
processes. The explanatory memorandum adds ‘naturally, citizens are free to comment, based on 
the individual reports and the annual report by means of letters, the press or political parties on the 
786
activities of the Ombudsman’.  
Moreover, there are some legal provisions which allow the administrative bodies – and where 
applicable, the official whose conduct was the object of an investigation – as well as the complainant 
to explain their point of view and give their opinions, for example on the Ombudsman’s preliminary 
787
findings. And as soon as the Ombudsman has completed an investigation, s/he must notify those 
788
involved about the findings and opinion as soon as possible, although no deadline is specified.  
However, the law does not include time provisions nor what kind of information must actively be 
submitted to Parliament. The only specific requirement as to the annual report is to provide financial 
789
information. Also, there are no provisions which require the Ombudsman to inform Parliament 
about the findings and opinions of individual investigations. S/he may do so, but it is not 
790
mandatory.  
The Ombudsman is also not required to have a complaints procedure. The general complaints and 
integrity provisions for civil servants apply for as long as the Ombudsman’s employees are 
appointed as civil servants. When the Ombudsman’s office personnel are contracted based on civil 
791
law, new procedures will have to be put in place. Also, the Ombudsman’s findings and opinions 
published in his/her official reports cannot be contested in court, because they are not considered to 
be administrative acts. However, as mentioned in the above, the Ombudsman and his/her staff do 
not enjoy explicit legal protection, and can – but so far have not been – held accountable in both civil 
and criminal court proceedings, including prosecution for abuses of office. 
 
Accountability (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DOES THE OMBUDSMAN REPORT AND IS ANSWERABLE FOR HIS/HER ACTIONS IN PRACTICE? 
 
The Ombudsman reports and is answerable for his/her actions as required, but his/her 
annual reports and findings and opinions are not discussed in Parliament, and the public 
makes little use the possibility to ask the Ombudsman for, for example, the annual report. 
The Ombudsman does have an internal complaints procedure.  
As mentioned above, the Ombudsman reports to Parliament as required in his/her annual report, 
which contains a lot of information related to both the Ombudsman’s investigations as well as the 
management of the Ombudsman’s office. The information required on previous year’s revenue and 
 
784
 Country ordinance Ombudsman, Article 27. 
785
 Ibid., Article 10 and Article 11 and the explanatory memorandum on Article 10. 
786
 Ibid., explanatory memorandum on Article 27. 
787
 Ibid., Articles 17 and 24. 
788
 Ibid., Article 25.3. 
789
 Ibid., Article 11. 
790
 Ibid., Article 28. 
791
 The Country ordinance Legal and material rights and obligations of civil servants (Landsverordening 
Materieel ambtenarenrecht), Official Curaçao Gazette, 2010, No.87, Appendix f contains several 
whistleblowing provisions, but does not apply to the Ombudsman and staff contracted by the Ombudsman 
himself (cf. Articles 1 and 2 of that ordinance).  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
135 
CURAÇAO 
 

proper execution of their tasks, as well as a provision which prohibits them from accepting any gift 
representing a value of more than NAf 50 (US$ 28). Gifts below that threshold are to be reported 
and registered internally. The code also stipulates that the Ombudsman and his/her staff may not be 
party to or have an interest in a decision taken in their function. The code furthermore espouses 
values such as professionalism, objectivity, respect and trustworthiness, and underscores the duty 
of confidentiality.  
Staff currently appointed as civil servants are also covered by the general integrity regulations for 
civil servants. (Also refer to Chapter VII.4 Public Sector.) 
 
Integrity mechanisms (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE INTEGRITY OF THE OMBUDSMAN ENSURED IN PRACTICE? 
 
The Ombudsman is reported to undertake several activities to ensure the integrity of the 
Ombudsman’s office, and there are no indications that it is not adequately ensured. However, 
as the code of ethics was only adopted recently, there presently is not sufficient information 
to assess whether or not it is applied effectively in practice. 
Although not legally required, before staff are appointed the Ombudsman makes inquiries into 
criminal antecedents, additional functions, and activities of spouses. Those inquiries do not cover 
financial interests. Also, the Ombudsman’s staff are trained on integrity and corruption issues on a 
regular basis, and the Ombudsman regularly meets with other ombudsmen in the region or within 
798
the Kingdom to discuss good practices. The Ombudsman notes, however, that education and 
training abroad can be expensive. In the past, this limited the number of people able to follow 
training courses. Against this background, the Ombudsman has invested in improved local training 
799
opportunities.   
In practice, no cases of gross misconduct on the job have been recorded up to now.  
 
Role 
 
Investigation 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE OMBUDSMAN ACTIVE AND EFFECTIVE IN DEALING WITH COMPLAINTS FROM THE 
PUBLIC? 
 
 
On an individual case basis, the Ombudsman is active and appears to be effective. A lack of 
government commitment combined with an absence of legal provisions for sanctioning non-
compliance, however, hamper structural improvements. 
 
798
 See, for example, Ombudsman of Curaçao, 2012:40; also Ombudsman of Curaçao, 2011:29 and 38. 
799
 Ombudsman of Curaçao, 2011:38.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
137 
CURAÇAO 
 

Because they are not considered to be administrative bodies and fall outside the Ombudsman’s 
810
jurisdiction, they were dealt with on a voluntary basis. Typically, complaints concern issues such 
as the length of procedures to receive financial support or to acquire permits, and improper ways of 
811
dealing with people. The Ombudsman also receives complaints about suspected integrity 
breaches, but does not register those separately. (Also refer to Chapter VII.4 Public Sector.) 
If the Ombudsman decides to follow up on a complaint, s/he may start a formal investigation. When 
concluded, this results in a report in which the Ombudsman determines whether or not the 
investigated action was fully or partially appropriate. If s/he deems fit, s/he provides some 
812
recommendations. The Ombudsman may also use the intervention method and act as a mediator 
813
to find a solution, usually a more speedy method to achieve the complainant’s goal. In practice, 
most complaints – approximately 80 per cent – are followed up with the intervention method rather 
814
than a full investigation.  
This assessment did not show whether or not the efforts of the Ombudsman in general have been 
effective, as this has not been studied yet. However, the large number of complaints received seem 
to indicate that the Ombudsman does fulfill a need. Also, the high number of cases dealt with 
through interventions suggests a significant number of complaints is successfully solved, even 
though not all complainants are satisfied with the result achieved through the Ombudsman’s 
815
intervention.  
However, on a more general level, we noted that the Ombudsman’s work could be more effective if 
working relations with the administration improves. Because the law does not contain any sanctions 
for non-compliance, in practice, this implies that necessary information is not always easy to 
816
obtain. Contact with government is reported to be increasingly time-consuming for the 
Ombudsman’s office, especially since the failure to appoint new contact persons after the change in 
817
constitutional relations. Positive interactions notwithstanding, government officials are said to not 
818
always cooperate with the Ombudsman, and it can take months to receive answers. To deal with 
this limitation, the Ombudsman has prepared an amendment of the country ordinance Ombudsman 
to incorporate the possibility of sanctions, such as disciplinary sanctions and fines, for those who 
refuse to cooperate with the Ombudsman’s investigation. More effective internal complaint handling 
by the government may also enhance the Ombudsman’s work, and allow for more pro-active 
investigations. At the moment, investigations undertaken at the Ombudsman’s initiative are limited, 
819
and priority is given to making up for delays in dealing with complaints. However, some 
Ombudsman-instigated investigations are carried out, such as a recent investigation into the 
820
compliance of government with judicial verdicts.  
The Ombudsman’s office does not have financial expertise. If such expertise is needed, the 
Ombudsman will refer the complaint to other institutions such as the government’s internal auditor, 
821
the Court of Audit, or the Public Prosecutor’s Office. 
 
 
810
 Ombudsman of Curaçao, 2012:14. 
811
 Cf. Ibid., Chapter 2. 
812
 Country ordinance, 2010, No. 87, Article 12.5 and Article 25.1. 
813
 Ibid., Article 12.9. 
814
 See, for example, Ombudsman of Curaçao 2012:14.  
815
 See, for example, ‘Ombudsman fails’ (Ombudsman laat het afweten), Antilliaans Dagblad, 5 March 
2013. 
816
 Note, however, that the Penal Code, Title XXVIII, does contain criminal sanctions for abuses of power 
(ambtsmisdrijven).  
817
 Ombudsman of Curaçao, 2012, 6 and 40. 
818
 Cf. Annual Report 2011, Chapter 2.  
819
 Ibid., Article 2.2; see, for example, Ombudsman of Curaçao, 2011:26.  
820
 See on this, for example, ‘Ombudsman investigates behavior departments’ (Ombudsman onderzoekt 
gedrag ministeries) via internationaljustice.rnw.nl [accessed 20 March 2013].  
821
 Verton Advies N.V., Controle en Advies Model Financiën Pais Kòrsou. Concept Report (Curaçao: 
Verton Advies N.V., April 2010), p.24.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
139 
CURAÇAO 
 

VII.8 SUPREME AUDIT AND 
SUPERVISORY INSTITUTIONS 
(PUBLIC SECTOR) 
STRUCTURE AND ORGANISATION 
The administration’s financial audit and supervisory system is made up of both internal and external 
institutions. This chapter discusses three of the main institutions, that is, the supreme audit 
institution ARC, the administration’s internal auditor SOAB, and the Board of financial supervision 
Cft.  
The Curaçao Court of Audit (ARC – Algemene Rekenkamer Curaçao) is the administration’s 
supreme external audit institution. It is responsible for examining the country’s revenues and 
829
expenditures. As such it assists Parliament in its role to scrutinise the work of government. The 
current Court of Audit has been in place since 10 October 2010, but its predecessor, the Court of 
Audit Netherlands Antilles (ARNA – Algemene Rekenkamer Nederlandse Antillen), dates back to 
830
1953. ARC is a High Council of State and consists of three members, including a president 
(referred to below as ‘the board’). Its main task is the auditing of the financial and material 
831
management of the public administration in the broadest sense. To do so, ARC performs 
regularity audits, performance audits and administrative integrity audits. 
ARC may use the findings of the internal audits of the administration’s internal auditor, as of 1994 
832
one of the tasks of SOAB (Stichting Overheidsaccountants Bureau). SOAB is a public foundation 
833
with a board of managing directors appointed by a supervisory board of five to seven people. 
SOAB has a broad aim, which includes auditing of the financial and material management of public 
finances and possessions, and also covers investigations with respect to financial irregularities, 
834
administrative organisation and internal control. 
Since 10 December 2008, and as part of the agreements between the Kingdom partners to 
835
reorganise the constitutional order, a form of temporary financial supervision based on consensus 
 
829
 Constitution of Curaçao (Staatsregeling van Curaçao), Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, No.86, Article 
68 (Below: Constitution). The explanatory memorandum on Article 68 adds that ARC must approve the 
accounts, but this is no longer reflected in the Constitution.  
830
 ARNA, Report on activities during the years 1991 to 2006 (Verslag van de werkzaamheden gedurende 
de jaren 1991 tot en met 2006) (Curaçao: Algemene Rekenkamer Nederlandse Antillen, July 2007).  
831
 Country ordinance Court of Audit Curaçao (Landsverordening Algemene Rekenkamer Curaçao), 
Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, No.87, Article 1. In two other regulations, ARC is also authorised to audits 
the financial statements of the Civil Servants Pension fund Curaçao (Ambtenaren Pensioenfonds 
Curaçao, APC, previously known as APNA) and the Landsloterij, the Country’s lottery.  
832
 Ibid, article 24 and the explanatory memorandum on Articles 22 and 24. Country ordinance 
Cooperation with Foundation Administration’s Accountants Bureau (SOAB) (Samenwerking met Stichting 
Overheidsaccountantsbureau) AB 1993, No.51. When asked, Transparency International was informed 
that the procedure to formally appoint SOAB as the internal auditor of the Country Curaçao was in 
process, but not yet concluded. On 10 April 2013, the minister of finance presented a draft ordinance to 
correct for this to Parliament (Parliament of Curacao, 2012-2013, No.32). In practice, dealings between 
government and SOAB and those between ARC and SOAB have followed the ordinance valid before the 
change in constitutional relations.  
833
 Charter SOAB, Article 7. 
834
 Ibid, Article 3.  
835
 Kingdom Act Financial Supervision Curaçao and Sint Maarten (Rijkswet financieel toezicht Curaçao en 
Sint Maarten), Bulletin of Acts and Decrees 2010, No.334 (below: Kingdom Act), Article 33. The Curaçao 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
141 
CURAÇAO 
 

significant problems in attracting personnel with an adequate educational background. Development 
842
of expertise is now on ARC’s agenda, but a structural staffing policy is not yet in place.  
843
SOAB itself is to ensure sufficient capacity and means to achieve the foundation’s goals. It has its 
own budget, and derives its capital among other things from fees for services to government(s) and 
844
subsidies such as those from USONA . Each year, SOAB and the Curaçao government jointly 
determine the compensation for the services and facilities to be provided. This compensation 
includes both audit and advisory activities. SOAB may put in a request for additional incidental extra 
845
resources, to be approved by Parliament in the course of the regular budgetary process. At the 
moment, SOAB’s budget is reported to be sufficient, but there are no long-term commitments. SOAB 
846
is also competent to manage its own personnel, with competitive salaries. Its workforce of around 
65 people is relatively stable, and includes both financial and other academic professionals. They 
are adequately educated and trained, in part due to SOAB’s professional link with the Dutch 
847
cooperative network, Quality-testing Public Auditors (KOA – Kwaliteitstoetsing Overheidsauditors) 
and a cooperation agreement with the Audit Office of the Dutch central government. 
Cft is funded from the Dutch state budget according to the approved budget, which can but does not 
848
need to be the same as Cft’s budget proposal. Cft manages its own budget, which is thought to be 
sufficient to perform its duties. The secretary and staff are made available on the recommendation of 
Cft on behalf of the Dutch minister of the interior and kingdom relations, and are under the 
849
management of Cft. Cft’s available personnel resources, of around 18 people, are adequate to 
perform its duties. Staff members have an adequate academic background and sufficient previous 
850
work experience, as well as adequate career development and training opportunities. 
 
Independence (law) 
Score: 75 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THERE FORMAL OPERATIONAL INDEPENDENCE OF THE SUPREME AUDIT AND 
SUPERVISORY INSTITUTIONS (PUBLIC SECTOR)? 
 
The legal framework contains important provisions to ensure formal independence of ARC 
and Cft, and SOAB’s positioning as a public foundation strengthens its formal operational 
independence as internal auditor. However, not all aspects, such as those on political 
activities, are always covered, and some regulations leave room for discretion. 
The principle of ARC’s independence, although to the regret of ARC itself is no longer explicitly 
mentioned in the Constitution, follows from its positioning as High Council of State and may also be 
 
842
 ARC, October 2012a: 18. Commission of experts, Assessment of government apparatus Curaçao and 
Sint Maarten (Toetsing overheidsapparaten Curaçao en Sint Maarten) (s.l.: Commission of experts, May 
2010), p.73.  
843
 Charter SOAB, Article 4.  
844
 This stands for Executing Agency of the Foundation for the Development of the Netherelands Antilles.  
845
 Ibid, Article 5; country ordinance Cooperation with SOAB, Article 8. 
846
 Ibid. Also refer to Commission of experts, May 2010: 37. 
847
 SOAB, Annual Report 2011 (Curaçao: SOAB, June 2012), p.23. Commission of experts, May 2010: 
37. SOAB’s personnel is to perform duties for other clients than Curaçao as well.  
848
 Kingdom Act, Article 9 and explanatory memorandum. Also refer to Cft’s board rules (below: Board 
rules), Article 8.  
849
 Kingdom Act, Article 6. 
850
 Cft’s personnel are to perform other duties, related to other islands within the Kingdom, as well. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
143 
CURAÇAO 
 

864
manifestly bad governance. In addition, members of the board of directors and the chairperson of 
the supervisory board are required to be chartered accountants or certified public accountants, and 
865
there are some provisions to guarantee their independence. Nevertheless, government does have 
some instruments to influence SOAB’s activities, if only through its annual budget negotiations. In 
the end, of course, Parliament and government may also choose to appoint another organisation as 
the administration’s internal auditor. In addition, charters are required to be in line with the current 
legislation, and changes therein, such as those involved with the new corporate governance 
866
regulations, may necessitate a change in SOAB’s charter. 
Cft derives its independent position from the Kingdom Act Financial Supervision Curaçao and Sint 
Maarten, which stipulates that board members of Cft shall be appointed on the basis of their 
867
expertise and are to act independently of outside influence (‘zonder last of ruggenspraak’). This 
868
Act can only be amended if all countries involved agree. Cft’s members of the board are 
appointed by Royal Decree, via the Council of Ministers of the Kingdom. They are appointed for 
three years, with no legal limit to the number of reappointments. One of the board members is to be 
appointed in accordance with the sentiment of the Curaçao government. However, board members 
can only be suspended or dismissed by the Council of Ministers of the Kingdom; the recommending 
869
administration merely needs to be consulted. Also, it is up to the Council of Ministers of the 
870
Kingdom to judge whether or not the board is severely failing in the performance of its duties. 
There are some specific regulations on incompatibility of positions, and members of the board are 
871
required to publish information on additional functions.  
Neither ARC, SOAB nor Cft have any specific form of immunity from prosecutions based on their 
normal duties. 
 
Independence (practice) 
Score: 75 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THE SUPREME AUDIT AND SUPERVISORY INSTITUTIONS (PUBLIC SECTOR) FREE FROM 
EXTERNAL INTERFERENCE IN THE PERFORMANCE OF THEIR WORK IN PRACTICE? 
 
ARC, SOAB and Cft appear, to a large degree, free from external interference. However, there 
are some worries that the high demand for SOAB’s services in general interferes with its 
operational performance in one of its tasks, that is, its audit of the government’s accounts.  
 
 
There are no examples, recent or otherwise, of political influence on appointments in any of the 
three institutions discussed here. The same goes for political influence on activities, although those 
interviewed indicated that there will always be attempts to do so and it may take quite some effort to 
be able to keep a firm stance. Political influence on adding an investigation to an already full agenda 
cannot be ruled out. However, there is some concern as to SOAB’s ability to adequately perform its 
activities related to the auditing of Curaçao’s annual account. SOAB’s scope of activities is very 
broad, and its expertise is in high demand. In practice, SOAB’s resources are allocated to a variety 
 
864
 Ibid, Article 14. Cf. Civil Code, Book 2, Articles 11 and 55.  
865
 Charter SOAB, Articles 7.1, 10.1 and Articles 4, 17.2 and 18.1. 
866
 See STBNO on concept Charter SOAB, 13 November 2012, available at www.sbtno.org. Cf. the 
explanatory memorandum of the Country ordinance Corporate governance (Landsverordening Corporate 
governance), Official Curaçao Gazette 2008, No.23, general part. 
867
 Kingdom Act, Article 2. 
868
 Ibid, explanatory memorandum. Cf. Article 38 of the Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands 
(Statuut voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden), Bulletin of Acts and Decrees 2010, No.775. 
869
 Kingdom Act, Article 2. 
870
 Ibid, Article 10. 
871
 Ibid, Article 3. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
145 
CURAÇAO 
 

required to be sent to Parliament, the former a month and a half after ARC has received a copy of 
877
the internal auditor’s report, and the latter before 1 July. There are no regulations which require 
ARC’s reports to be debated in Parliament, but Parliament is not allowed to approve the 
878
government’s annual account if it does not have ARC’s report on that account. 
ARC also produces notifications. Some are mandatory, such as notifications to the Executive or 
Parliament of any objections ARC has with respect to demonstrable errors or irregularities in, for 
example, expenditures. If consultations with the ministers involved do not have satisfactory results, 
Parliament is to be notified as well. ARC may – but is not required to – notify Parliament and the 
governor if it deems it to be in the county’s interest. Information and findings which, by their very 
nature, are confidential may not be made public, but can be passed on to ministers, the governor or 
879
Parliament in confidence.  
Standard regulations on public access to government information do not apply to ARC, in the sense 
that ARC is not an administrative body with a duty of disclosure. However, a request to an 
administrative body may result in public disclosure if the documents requested are actually with that 
body and fulfil certain conditions.  
The reports and activities of SOAB are prepared for internal government use. Consequently, with 
the exception of the auditor’s report on Curaçao’s annual account, reports and information on 
activities of SOAB are not required to be sent to Parliament or to be made public directly. However, 
880
in ways similar to ARC, a request to an administrative body may result in public disclosure. SOAB 
is required to send its annual report and accounts to government, but there are no regulations 
881
requiring SOAB to make those documents publicly available.  
Cft is not required by law to make its reports and recommendations known to the general public, but 
in ways similar to ARC and SOAB, a request based on public access to government information 
882
regulations to an administrative body may result in public disclosure. However, the law stipulates 
that draft budget(s) (changes) sent to Parliament are to be accompanied by Cft’s recommendations 
883
on those drafts. In addition, Cft is required – through the minister of the interior and kingdom 
relations – to inform both the Curaçao and Kingdom government and the Curaçao and Dutch 
884
Parliament every six months about its activities.  
 
Transparency (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THERE TRANSPARENCY IN THE ACTIVITIES AND DECISIONS OF THE SUPREME AUDIT AND 
SUPERVISORY INSTITUTIONS (PUBLIC SECTOR) IN PRACTICE? 
 
ARC publishes all its reports and other documents sent to Parliament on its website, but 
most of its audit reports and annual reports have not been made public in proper time. SOAB 
does not make its audit and advisory reports public, nor does it publicise an overview of all 
 
877
 Country ordinance Court of Audit, Article 37; Country ordinance Government accounts 2010, Article 
50.  
878
 Country ordinance Government accounts, Article 51.4 and the explanatory memorandum. Also refer to 
Article 85 of the Constitution.  
879
 Ibid, Article 26, 27, 28 and 38. 
880
 Cf. Country ordinance Government accounts 2010, Article 51. 
881
 Charter SOAB, Article 16.3 and 16.4. 
882
 Also refer to M.M. Bense, ‘Board of financial supervision and general administrative regulations’ (Het 
College financieel toezicht en algemene bestuursrechtelijke regelingen), Caribisch Juristenblad, 2, 2012.  
883
 Kingdom Act, Article 11. 
884
 Idem, Article 4 and the explanatory memorandum. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
147 
CURAÇAO 
 

Accountability (law) 
Score: 75 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE PROVISIONS IN PLACE TO ENSURE THAT THE SUPREME AUDIT AND SUPERVISORY 
INSTITUTIONS (PUBLIC SECTOR) HAVE TO REPORT AND BE ANSWERABLE FOR THEIR ACTIONS? 
 
There are several legal provisions in place to ensure that ARC, SOAB and Cft are answerable 
for their actions, such as the requirement to regularly report on their activities and provide 
for independently-audited financial accounts. There are no possibilities to appeal against the 
final opinions of ARC and SOAB. 
ARC has to present an annual report on its own activities before 1 July of each year to the governor 
and Parliament. This report is also required to mention specific objections ARC may have 
concerning government’s financial management, findings and judgments of investigations on 
request of Parliament, and findings of investigations on administrative integrity. In addition, ARC’s 
annual report is to include findings which may be relevant for Parliament’s assessment of policies 
891
adopted. With regard to its own financial management, ARC is required to account through the 
892
regular Curaçao accountability processes. 
There are some legal provisions which allow the administrative bodies audited by ARC to respond to 
objections ARC may have before ARC comes to its final opinion. In addition, ARC is required to 
893
provide the ministers concerned with information, as long as the nature of its work allows this. 
However, there is no right of appeal to challenge the final audit results of ARC, as ARC is not 
894
considered to be an administrative body issuing decisions against which appeal is possible. 
Because ARC’s board members and employees are not considered to be civil servants, the general 
895
complaints provisions in place for civil servants also do not apply. (But see below on 
accountants.)  
As mentioned above, SOAB is required to produce an annual report including a financial statement 
accompanied by a report of an external accountant, and is to do so within six months after the 
reporting year ends. Government’s approval of its accounts shall be deemed to grant discharge to 
both its board of directors and its supervisory board. In addition, SOAB is required to report in writing 
on each audit or advice requested by government, and SOAB and the executive are to confer every 
896
three months. Because SOAB’s internal audits are not considered decisions in administrative law, 
it is not possible to challenge SOAB’s audit results in administrative proceedings. However, because 
SOAB is a public foundation, there are some general civil law provisions in case of serious doubts 
897
as to the board’s adherence to the law and its charter, and the governance of the foundation.  
Cft is required to inform both the Curaçao and Kingdom governments and the Curaçao and Dutch 
Parliaments every six months about its activities. In addition, when asked, Cft is to provide 
information on its activities to the minister of the interior and kingdom relations, the Dutch minister of 
898
finance and the Curaçao Council of Ministers. Cft is required to have its financial management 
audited by the internal and external auditor of the Dutch administration. The results of those audits 
are to be reported upon through the regular Dutch accountability channels between government and 
899
the Dutch Parliament. There are no possibilities to challenge recommendations or other acts of 
 
891
 Country ordinance Court of Audit, Articles 28, 30, 32 and 37. 
892
 Cf. Country ordinance Government accounts 2010, especially Chapter 4, Section 4. Also refer to 
Articles 34 and 38.  
893
 Country ordinance Court of Audit, Articles 27, 47 and 39. Also refer to Article 28. 
894
 See country ordinance Administrative law, Article 3. 
895
 That is, in the Court of Audit’s Regulations for the Secretary and the Staff Regulations.  
896
 Charter SOAB, Article 16; country ordinance Cooperation with SOAB, Articles 4 and 5. 
897
 Civil Code, Book 2, Articles 54 and 55. Also: Article 271. 
898
 Kingdom Act, Article 4.3. 
899
 Board rules, Article 8. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
149 
CURAÇAO 
 

government to adapt its budget. The Council of State rejected the larger part of the appeal, leaving 
906
the essence of the instruction intact.  
As for complaints, although the Dutch Accountantskamer does note an increase in complaints filed 
against accountants from the former Netherlands Antilles, there is only one known complaint filed 
907
against individual accountants employed at either ARC, SOAB or Cft.  
 
Integrity mechanisms (law) 
Score: 75 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE MECHANISMS IN PLACE TO ENSURE THE INTEGRITY OF THE SUPREME AUDIT AND 
SUPERVISORY INSTITUTIONS (PUBLIC SECTOR)? 
 
ARC has several specific provisions to ensure its integrity. SOAB has several provisions as 
well, but it could not be determined how operational they are. Cft’s employees are all 
appointed by the Dutch minister of the interior and kingdom relations and as such have to 
abide by the general Dutch integrity rules for civil servants. Accountants employed in the 
supreme audit and supervisory institutions are covered by additional professional integrity 
rules.  
There are several regulations in place to ensure the integrity of ARC, in addition to those noted in 
the section on Independence on additional functions and activities, and financial interests. Thus, 
before accepting office, the board members and secretary have to swear an oath or solemnly affirm 
that they have not given or promised anything to obtain their appointment and will not do so, and will 
not be bought. The oath also includes the positive obligation to abide by the Constitution and to 
908
exercise one’s duties with honesty, punctuality and impartiality. Staff of ARC have to do the same. 
909
ARC’s internal regulations contain similar provisions related to the acceptance of gifts. Moreover, 
members of the board and the secretary are not to be present at meetings or take decisions on any 
matter which concerns them or people with whom they are connected though close family or other 
910
ties, and are not to take part in investigations of, and decisions which concern, their accounts. 
ARC also has a duty of confidentiality, and both board members and staff, as well as others 
involved, are required to keep secret all information that has become known to them in the 
performance of ARC’s investigations, unless this information has to be used to draft a report and 
barring exceptions related to suspected criminal offences. A deliberate violation of this duty is a 
911
criminal offence. There are no specific requirements related to pre-employment screening, but a 
background check may be part of the appointment procedure.  
Accountants employed at ARC are bound to specific professional rules. Thus, for example, 
chartered accountants associated with the Dutch professional organisation NBA (Nederlandse 
Beroepsorganisatie van Accountants) are bound to the organisation’s code of conduct, which 
incorporates international standards set by the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) and 
espouses values such as independence and objectivity. The code also contains specific rules 
 
906
 Decree of 2 November 2012 on the appeal of the Council of Ministers of Curaçao against the Decree 
of 13 July 2012 regarding the instruction to the Government of Curaçao to adjust the budget of 2012 
taking into account the financial standards mentioned in Article 15 of the Kingdom Act Financial 
Supervision Curaçao and Sint Maarten, Dutch Bulletin of Acts, Orders and Decrees, 2012, No.535. 
907
 Accountantskamer, Annual Report 2011 – Outlook 2012 (Jaarverslag 2011 – Vooruitblik 2012), p.17. 
908
 Country ordinance, Articles 8 and 18.  
909
 Staff Regulations and Regulations for the Secretary, as consulted at the Court of Audit on 13 May 
2013.  
910
 Ibid, Article 17. 
911
 Country ordinance Court of Audit, Articles 38, 46 and 50 and the explanatory memorandum. There are 
additional provisions in the Staff Regulations and the Regulations. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
151 
CURAÇAO 
 

919
descriptions and a part of assessment procedures. Cft has appointed a confidant 
920
(vertrouwenspersoon) for members of its staff. However, information to independently assess the 
consistency and effectiveness of these efforts is not available.  
ARC, SOAB and Cft are all reported to have experienced one or two violations of ethical standards. 
Those instances largely concerned the exposure of confidential information, and were sanctioned 
with dismissal. Another case concerned harassment and ended in resignation. 
 
Role 
 
Effective financial audits (law and practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DO THE SUPREME AUDIT AND SUPERVISORY INSTITUTIONS (PUBLIC SECTOR) PROVIDE 
EFFECTIVE AUDITS OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE? 
 
While some progress has been made, the effectiveness of audits of public expenditure 
remains limited, in large part because of delays or a lack of information beyond the control of 
the auditors. This is especially the case with respect to expenditures of public companies 
and public foundations.  
ARC is authorised to perform both regularity audits and performance audits of public administration 
921
in the broadest sense. In practice, ARC gives priority to the examination of the government’s 
922
annual accounts and the monitoring of developments in its financial management. Cft does not 
perform audits, but monitors among other things the budget process. 
ARC is not expected to base its final judgment completely on its own research, and the law 
stipulates that it may use the results of internal controls, such as those of SOAB, on its own 
923
discretion and without prejudice to its own investigative powers. In practice, ARC is of the opinion 
924
that part of the external control is to be performed by SOAB. In those instances where SOAB has 
not audited an account, ARC may conclude that the accuracy, completeness and regularity of 
income and expenses remains uncertain and withhold its approval, which is exactly what it did with 
925
respect to the annual account over (most of) 2010.  
As mentioned above, over the years Curaçao – along with others within the former Netherlands 
Antilles – developed a serious backlog in the government’s preparation of its annual accounts, which 
translated into backlogs in the audit institutions. The run-up to the constitutional changes went hand 
in hand with a catching up. SOAB speeded up its completion of the audits, but performed a limited 
audit only – that is, a marginal check on mistakes comparable to those made in earlier accounts – 
and provided the accounts with adverse opinions. ARC performed some research of its own but 
made significant use of SOAB’s activities and in August 2011 was able to send its report on the 
926
accounts over 2004-2009 to Parliament. In a report on Curaçao’s financial management, based 
 
919
 Also: Commission of experts, May 2010: 37. 
920
 Board rules, Article 9. 
921
 Country ordinance Court of Audit, Articles 22 and 29. 
922
 See for example ARNA, July 2009: 8. 
923
 Country ordinance Court of Audit, Article 24 and explanatory memorandum on Article 22. 
924
 Cft, October 2011: 30. 
925
 Cf. ARC, October 2012b: 5-6 and 44. 
926
 ARC, August 2011: 5. Also refer to ARNA, July 2009: 11 and 23 and Cft, October 2011: 30. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
153 
CURAÇAO 
 

939
foundations are required to publish their annual reports and accounts. Public companies and 
public foundations are under no legal obligation to provide Parliament with information. And although 
940
the minister of finance does receive some information, this is not on a regular basis. 
 
Detecting and sanctioning misbehaviour (law and practice) 
Score: 50 
 
DO THE SUPREME AUDIT AND SUPERVISORY INSTITUTIONS (PUBLIC SECTOR) DETECT AND INVESTIGATE 
MISBEHAVIOUR OF PUBLIC OFFICEHOLDERS? 
 
ARC and SOAB have investigative powers to detect misbehaviour of public officeholders. In 
practice, they have used these powers several times, but they do not audit, for example, 
(public) expenditures of public officeholders on a regular basis.  
 
ARC is authorised to conduct investigations on the administrative integrity of both elected and 
941
appointed public officeholders, and has several important powers to identify misbehaviour and 
corruption. Generally speaking, ARC’s powers to examine the country’s revenues and expenditures 
942
are not subject to any restrictions, including access to information regarding ‘secret expenses’. 
ARC is also allowed access to all places deemed necessary, except for private homes. If necessary, 
943 944
the police may be called for assistance. SOAB has similar investigative powers. However, 
neither ARC nor SOAB are able to sanction misbehaviour. If there is suspicion of a criminal offence, 
the law enforcement agencies, that is, the public prosecutor and the special police force will have to 
945
be notified. 
In practice, ARC does conduct audits into those areas within the administration which are 
particularly sensitive to possible misbehaviour and corruption or with large sums of public spending 
involved. Thus, for example, ARC published reports on the legality and efficiency of appointment 
practices and staffing costs within the administration, and the legality and efficiency of the provision 
of subsidies and residence permits. SOAB, for its turn, may very well identify possible misbehaviour 
and corruption in investigations commissioned by government, such as those into public contracting 
or quick scans into the financial state of affairs within public companies. However, neither ARC nor 
SOAB proactively set out to detect misbehaviour or corruption of elected or appointed public 
officeholders, and, for example, do not audit (public) expenditures of public officeholders on a 
regular basis. If they do, it is because they run into integrity issues in the course of their regular 
audits or because they are asked to do so by either Parliament or – in the case of SOAB – 
government. Thus, for example, in 2011 both SOAB and ARC looked into some parliamentary 
expenses, the former on request of government, the latter – in reaction to the former – on request of 
Parliament itself. Some members of Parliament are said to have described this course of events as 
946 947
a ‘witch hunt’, and the results of ARC’s study exonerated the accused officeholder. The results 
948
of the SOAB study were not made public. On the request of Parliament, ARC recently also looked 
 
939
 Cf. Corporate governance code, 5.1 and 3.12. The Code is based on the Dutch ‘Code Tabaksblat’, a 
corporate governance code for listed companies. 
940
 Cft, October 2011: 18. 
941
 Country ordinance Court of Audit, Article 32. 
942
 Ibid, Articles 1 and 43 and the explanatory memorandum.  
943
 Ibid, Article 48. 
944
 Country ordinance Cooperation with SOAB, Article 6.   
945
 Country ordinance Court of Audit, Article 46 and the explanatory memorandum.  
946
 ‘Parliament investigates use of credit card’ (Staten onderzoekt gebruik creditcard), 15 March 2011, via 
www.rnw.nl [accessed 10 January 2013]. 
947
 ARC, Report use credit card by Secretary General in the period January 2008 to 1 April 2011 (Rapport 
gebruik creditcard griffier in de periode januari 2008 tot 1 april 2011) (Curaçao, ARC: 24 November 2011).  
948
 SOAB’s annual report over 2011does mention the study and its finalisation, but not its outcome. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
155 
CURAÇAO 
 

957
sufficient to enable government to ‘gain control’. Parliament, for its part, does not put significant 
pressure on government to improve its financial management. Reports are hardly ever substantively 
debated, and if they are, Parliament is said to question ARC’s findings rather than denounce acts of 
958
government.  
In 2012, after Cft’s PEFA assessment into the state of the financial management, government – in 
consultation with Cft – drew up a five-year improvement plan which now is a priority at the Ministry 
of Finance. Curaçao’s Budget 2013 reflects this, among others in the government’s objective to 
make Curaçao’s audited accounts publicly available as of 2014, also on the government’s website, 
959
in time and together with the audit reports on the accounts. However, although this has led to a 
greater focus on financial management, so far, it has not yet resulted in the necessary information 
that would enable Parliament to adequately gain an oversight of the financial management of the 
Executive. 
 
957
 ARC, October 2012b: 10. Also refer to ARC, August 2011: 12 and Cft, October 2011: 9.  
958
 Cft, October 2011: 9 and 32; ARC, October 2012a: 17. 
959
 Cft, August 2012: 14. Explanatory memorandum on the Budget 2013, p.282. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
157 
CURAÇAO 
 

 
ARTICLE 6 OF THE UN CONVENTION AGAINST 
CORRUPTION 
 
Preventive anti-corruption body or bodies 
 
1. Each State Party shall, in accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal system, 
ensure the existence of a body or bodies, as appropriate, that prevent corruption by such 
means as: 
 
962
(a) Implementing the policies referred to in Article 5 of this Convention and, where 
appropriate, overseeing and coordinating the implementation of those policies; 
 
(b) Increasing and disseminating knowledge about the prevention of corruption. 
 
2. Each State Party shall grant the body or bodies referred to in paragraph 1 of this article 
the necessary independence, in accordance with the fundamental principles of its legal 
system, to enable the body or bodies to carry out its or their functions effectively and free 
from any undue influence. The necessary material resources and specialised staff, as well 
as the training that such staff may require to carry out their functions, should be provided. 
 
3. Each State Party shall inform the Secretary-General of the United Nations of the name 
and address of the authority or authorities that may assist other States Parties in 
developing and implementing specific measures for the prevention of corruption. 
 
 
An independent national anti-corruption agency could be important in providing expertise and 
advice. The agency could contribute to the comprehensiveness and effectiveness of the National 
Integrity System of Curaçao by offsetting weaknesses in the system’s pillars. If a pillar’s own 
correction mechanisms fail or if other external correction mechanisms, including watchdogs such as 
the media or civil society, have limitations to effectively push for change, an anti-corruption agency 
may be able to do so.The agency could possibly also play a role in a whistleblower policy. The focus 
of such an agency should be on all forms of corruption in the (semi) public and private sector. It is 
necessary to clearly distinguish its powers and responsibilities from those of other agencies such as 
the Ombudsman (Chapter VII.7), and of Curaçao’s special police force (Landsrecherche) (Chapter 
VII.5) which falls directly under the authority of the Procurator General and focuses on investigations 
of alleged criminal offences committed by civil servants (including politicians).  
However, a new organisational body would only be useful if there is interest on the part of the 
government and the ministries. Political support for integrity, adequate empowerment, resources 
and autonomy to operate are conditions for an anti-corruption agency to be successful.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
962
 Preventive anti-corruption policies and practices, Article 5. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
159 
CURAÇAO 
 

ASSESSMENT  
 
Capacity 
 
Resources (law) 
Score: 75 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DOES THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK PROVIDE AN ENVIRONMENT CONDUCIVE TO THE FORMATION 
AND OPERATION OF POLITICAL PARTIES? 
 
The existing legal framework does not pose any significant hurdles to the formation and 
operation of political parties, although there is an electoral threshold. However, state support 
of political parties is not provided for. 
There are no specific requirements for the establishment of political parties and there is no ban on 
specific party ideologies. The right of association is recognised in the Constitution and can only be 
971
restricted in the interest of public order. The Constitution also recognises the freedom of assembly 
and the right to protest, which also can only be restricted for a limited number of reasons, for 
972
example to combat or prevent disorder or in the interest of public order. A licence to assemble or 
protest is not required; a notification to the authorities suffices. This notification is required to state, 
among other things, the goal of the meeting or demonstration. However, the law explicitly states that 
973
no information on the content of the thoughts or feelings to be made public is required. The Penal 
Code contains important provisions to allow for criminal proceedings against those who, alone or 
974
with others, engage in offensive, discriminating or hate-inciting expressions. 
In practice, most of Curaçao’s political parties are associations with legal personality under private 
law. Although there have been occasions in which natural persons put up their own lists of 
candidates for nomination, all candidates chosen during the last elections were nominated by 
975
associations. Parties have to follow the requirements for such associations as laid down in the 
Civil Code, but, because these are not very restrictive, they have a considerable amount of freedom 
976
as to how to organise and operate the political party. (Also refer to the section on Integrity.)  
However, new political parties that want to enter an election do have to meet some more specific 
requirements. Thus, those groups not represented in Parliament are required to be supported by a 
977
sufficient number of voters in order to participate in the elections and to contribute NAf 2,000 ( 
978
US$ 1,100). They also have to fulfil some more detailed administrative requirements to make sure 
their list of candidates can be validated by the Supreme Electoral Council (HSB – 
979
Hoofdstembureau). If the registration of their list of candidates is rejected by the electoral council, 
they may appeal against that decision. Proceedings are to be instituted before the Court of First 
 
971
 Constitution of Curaçao (Staatsregeling van Curaçao), Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, No. 86, Article 
10; also refer to Civil Code, Book 2, Article 24.  
972
 Constitution, Article 11 and Country ordinance Public Manifestations (Landsverordening Openbare 
manifestaties), Appendix s to Official Curaçao Gazette, 2010, No.87, Appendix s.  
973
 Country ordinance Public manifestations, Articles 4 and 5 and the explanatory memorandum.  
974
 Penal Code, Book 2, Title V. 
975
 See www.curacao-chamber.an [accessed 3 June 2013]. 
976
 See Civil Code, Book 2. 
977
 That is, at least one per cent of the sum of the votes casts of the last elections. See Electoral Code, 
Article 16. Also refer to Rogier 2012:145. 
978
 Electoral Code, Article 24. 
979
 Ibid., Articles 25, 28 and 29.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
161 
CURAÇAO 
 

their finances public. However, on the basis of information collected in our assessment, some 
observations can be made. First, the relative importance of the different private funds is likely to 
differ between the political parties, but the majority of funds is believed to come from fundraising 
activities, gifts and sponsors. Second, the financial basis of political parties does not appear to be a 
strong one, and it has been suggested that political parties in general are faced with large debts. 
Third, the amount of money involved in political campaigns is reported to have increased 
considerably, as has the importance of a media presence, such as a daily radio talk to inform the 
public about political ideas. 
These observations combined suggest an increasing importance of and dependence on private 
financial donors, which is why the abovementioned regulations on political party financing have been 
introduced. These regulations are further addressed below. Here, it suffices to say that currently, 
according to some, the system in place allows for and has resulted in an unacceptable influence of 
those with money. The lack of transparency of political party finances makes it impossible to 
independently establish the facts. Whether in practice the amount of resources available to political 
988
parties is sufficient to allow for effective political competition, therefore, cannot be determined.  
There is one exception to the formal rule that political parties do not receive public funding. 
Sometimes state resources may be used by the ruling parties for party political purposes, thus 
providing an unfair advantage to those already in power. This can be particularly sensitive in the run-
up to key processes, for example when debating constitutional changes. According to the Court of 
Audit, in the case of two information campaigns – one regarding the elections of 2007 and one 
regarding a referendum in 2009 – the Executive did not provide objective and reliable information, 
but used the campaigns for party political purposes in ‘a dangerous way’. ‘Because of this, a line 
989
was crossed which opens the door for the financing of party political (election) campaigns.’  
 
Independence (law) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE LEGAL SAFEGUARDS TO PREVENT UNWARRANTED EXTERNAL INTERFERENCE IN 
THE ACTIVITIES OF POLITICAL PARTIES? 
 
There are several legal safeguards to allow political parties to function free of external 
interference, but the regulation of party finances, although an improvement, does contain 
important loopholes.  
There is no specific legislation regarding state monitoring or investigation of political party 
operations. There are also no specific regulations allowing for mandatory state attendance of 
political party meetings, and political meetings can take place in private. The provisions that apply, 
apply in general. Thus, for example, the minister of justice or those appointed by him may access 
meetings or demonstrations open to the public, and may use force to enter if necessary. However, 
this is only allowed for clear and legitimate public interests such as public health or the combating or 
990
prevention of disorder. Also, the Security Service Curaçao (Veiligheidsdienst Curaçao) is 
authorised to monitor organisations and individuals and it may use both general and specific 
 
988
 Also refer to Oberon Nauta, Good Governance in ‘The West’. Institutional and Social Constraints of 
Good Governance in the Caribbean Parts of the Dutch Kingdom (Goed bestuur in de West, Institutionele 
en maatschappelijke beperkingen voor goed bestuur in de Caribische rijksdelen) (Oisterwijk: Uitgeverij 
BOXPress 2011,  2011), p.67. 
989
 ARC, Report information campaigns Island territory Curaçao regarding the elections of 20 April 2007 
and the referendum of 15 May 2009 (Rapport informationcampagnes Eilandgebied Curaçao inzake de 
verkiezingen van 20 april 2007 en het referendum van 15 mei  2009) (Curaçao: Algemene Rekenkamer 
Curaçao), p.2.  
990
 Country ordinance Public manifestations, Article 10. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
163 
CURAÇAO 
 

In the tumultuous period just before the October 2012 elections, as mentioned earlier, there were 
995
some reports of intimidation. When asked, several experts confirmed harassment and attacks on 
political party members by actors linked to other political parties. In addition, disputes between 
politicians are increasingly battled out via reporting, to such a degree that, in November 2012, the 
Public Prosecutor’s Office Curaçao announced the installation of a special committee to review 
996
‘politically sensitive reports’ and advise on whether or not to further investigate and prosecute. 
(Also refer to VII.5 Law Enforcement Agencies and VII.6 Electoral Management Body.) 
As for undue influence of party financers in practice, the important point to reiterate is that the origin 
of most party finances is not publicly known. Many of those interviewed in our assessment pointed 
out that this lack of transparency may imply a lack of independence of political parties as well.  
 
Governance 
 
Transparency (law) 
Score: 0 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE REGULATIONS IN PLACE THAT REQUIRE PARTIES TO MAKE THEIR FINANCIAL 
INFORMATION PUBLICLY AVAILABLE? 
 
Curaçao’s political parties and politicians are not required to make any information on their 
finances publicly available. 
There are no regulations in place that require political parties to make their financial information 
publicly available. The country ordinance on the finances of political groups does not require parties 
997
to make their finances transparent to the public. There is also no such obligation for associations 
998
in general. Thus, neither annual reports and accounts, nor information about donations and gifts 
received by parties or politicians in general, or information about campaign donations is required to 
be made public.  
In addition, because the two involved oversight bodies, the Supreme Electoral Council and the 
administration’s internal auditor (SOAB – Stichting Overheidsaccountantsbureau), do not fall under 
the scope of the Act on public access to government information, and their reports are not required 
to be sent to government, it is unlikely that financial reports handed in by political parties can be 
obtained through a request on the basis of the freedom of information regulations. Also, the law 
stipulates that those involved in the execution of the regulations on political party finances are, with 
some exceptions, under the obligation to keep secret ‘information of which he knows or reasonably 
999
can be expected to know the confidential nature’. Breach of this is a punishable offence.  
 
 
 
 
995
 See on this, for example ‘VBC: “Intimidation is unacceptable”’ (VBC: ‘Intimidatie is onacceptabel’) via 
www.versgeperst.com  [accessed 17 May 2013]. 
996
 ‘Review Committee politically sensitive reports’ (Toetsingscommissie voor politiek gevoelige 
aangiften), Press statement Public Prosecutor’s Office, Parket Procureur-Generaal, 12 November 2012 
via qracao.net. [accessed 15 March 2013]. 
997
 See Country ordinance Finances political groups.  
998
 Cf. Civil Code, Book 2, Article 89. The board of an association is required to present to its general 
meeting for approval an annual report and annual account within eight months after the reporting year.  
999
 Country ordinance Finances political groups, Articles 20 and 21. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
165 
CURAÇAO 
 

Each year, before 1 April, political groups are required to send the Supreme Electoral Council their 
annual report. This report is to contain information on the composition of the board, the number of 
members (contribuerende personen), the amount of the annual contribution as well as the activities 
1005
carried out by the political group. They are also required to send in their annual account which is 
to provide information on the group’s financial position as well as a consolidated statement of its 
1006
revenues and expenditures. The electoral council, in turn, is to send these annual accounts to 
the administration’s internal auditor for auditing. The internal auditor is to report back with its advice 
1007
to the electoral council. The council is also authorised to prescribe additional provisions with 
regard to the financial administration, annual reports and annual accounts of political groups, but 
1008
these provisions require the government’s approval.  
In addition, political groups are required to maintain a permanent register including each gift of or 
worth NAf 5,000 (US$ 2.800)or more, also registering the date donations were made and names 
and addresses of donors. This includes gifts in kind and services provided, and also if those 
1009
services are offered at a reduced price. Candidates for Parliament are also required to maintain 
such a register, but only need to do so from nomination day up until election day. (Also refer to 
1010
Chapter VII.2 Legislature.) Each year, before 1 February, political groups are required to send 
the electoral council a copy of the previous year’s register, together with a signed statement to 
confirm its accuracy. Candidates put up for election are only required to do so within a month after 
1011
the elections. At the request of the electoral council, the internal auditor is to verify the accuracy 
1012
of the information provided. The results of an audit are to be stored by the electoral council.  
To supervise political parties’ compliance with the regulations, the electoral council is authorised to 
exercise its supervisory powers any time it suspects an act in violation with the ordinance, and to 
enable effective control, political groups are required to maintain an up-to-date financial 
1013
administration.  
However, the current legislative framework in place contains some important loopholes and 
ambiguities. Thus, for example, as mentioned, money received through fundraising activities is not 
required to be registered as a gift, that is, separately, and is only to be included in consolidated 
1014
statements. The explanatory memorandum states that this is to protect the privacy of those who 
gave their contribution in fundraising activities, presumably because it is assumed only small sums 
1015
of money are then involved. Also, although anonymous gifts are not to be kept, there is no 
1016
penalty if parties do not deposit those gifts with the Curaçao Exchequer. Furthermore, because 
political parties are only required to register gifts above a certain threshold, it is unclear how 
compliance with the absolute maximum of NAf 25,000 (US$ 14,000) per year is to be monitored 
1017
without using a fine-tooth comb through the financial administrations of political parties. More 
generally, as also noted in the explanatory memorandum of the ordinance, the registration threshold 
may be abused to elude the registration duty. This is also true for donations in cash – presumably 
including pre-paid gift or money cards – which are allowed, although the explanatory memorandum 
 
1005
 Ibid., Article 3 and the explanatory memorandum. 
1006
 Ibid., Article 4. 
1007
 Ibid., Article 5. Note however that although the ordinance itself requires the electoral council to do so, 
the explanatory memorandum suggests it may or may not do so, depending on whether it sees reason for 
further investigation.  
1008
 Ibid., Article 6. 
1009
 Ibid., Article 7 and the explanatory memorandum. 
1010
 Ibid., Articles 8, 9 and 11. 
1011
 Ibid., Article 12. 
1012
 Ibid., Article 13; also refer to Articles 14 and 15. 
1013
 Ibid., Articles 2 and 17 and the explanatory memorandum. 
1014
 Ibid., Article 7. 
1015
 Ibid., general part of the explanatory memorandum. 
1016
 Ibid., compare Articles 16, 18 and 21. Also refer to the explanatory memorandum on Article 21 
(labelled 22). 
1017
 Ibid., Article 2. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
167 
CURAÇAO 
 

1021
Integrity mechanisms (law) 
 
Score: 75 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE ORGANISATIONAL REGULATIONS REGARDING THE INTERNAL DEMOCRATIC 
GOVERNANCE OF THE MAIN POLITICAL PARTIES? 
 
Political parties have extensive freedom to shape their internal governance and differ 
considerably in the ways they have organised the election of their party leaders and political 
candidates. Parties also have different membership requirements. 
As mentioned, most political parties are associations, and thus the general rules of decision-making 
under the Civil Code apply to them. This implies they have extensive freedom to shape their internal 
organisation, although there are a few legal requirements. For example, each party member must be 
allowed the opportunity to participate in the vote on the appointment of the board, either directly or 
1022
indirectly, and members are to have at least one vote at the general meeting. The Code also 
requires the board of an association to annually present an annual report and accounts – audited by 
an external expert or internally, by members not part of the board – for approval to the general 
1023
meeting of members.  
Thus, regulating internal democratic governance is mainly up to the political parties themselves. 
Four out of the six political parties currently represented in Parliament have drafted somewhat 
elaborate provisions with regard to their internal democratic governance. For example, they may 
have provisions on the composition and responsibilities of party councils, district commissions and 
1024
youth divisions. The charters of the other two parties are less specified, but do include more 
general provisions on membership, composition and responsibilities of the board and general 
1025
members meeting.  
The possibility to join a party as a regular member and influence its internal decision-making 
processes using the right to vote at general meetings, differs between the parties. One party only 
requires their regular members to be 18 years or older; two other parties require them to be 
1026
inhabitants as well, but do not require Dutch nationality. Two parties require their regular 
members to be eligible to vote in Curaçao, and thus require members to be 18 years or older, 
1027
residents of Curaçao and in possession of Dutch nationality. One party restricts regular 
membership to those born in Curaçao or those, who, directly prior to membership, have been 
resident for at least 10 years in a row. This party is also the only party that allows non-natural 
1028
persons – associations established on Curaçao – to be a member of the party.  
 
1021
 This section is based on the Charters (statuten) and Rules of Procedure (huishoudelijke reglementen) 
of the six political parties elected into Parliament in the elections of October 2013 in as far as the latter 
were available. Use is made of information deposited at the Curaçao Chamber of Commerce, information 
provided via website of political parties and information sent by one political party. Four out of the six 
Rules of Procedure could not be found on the internet and were requested from the political parties 
themselves. One party responded positively, and sent its Rules of Procedure. 
1022
 Civil Code, Book 2, for example Articles 80 and 81.  
1023
 Ibid., Book 2, Article 89. 
1024
 Charters of MAN, PAIS, PAR and PNP. 
1025
 Charters MFK and PS. 
1026
 Charter MFK, Articles 5 and 14; Charter MAN, Article 4 and Rules of Procedure, Article 2; Charter 
PAIS, Articles 6 and 28. 
1027
 Charter PAR, Articles 6 and 9 and Charter PNP, Articles 6 and 9. PNP also allows extraordinary 
members, that is, those living abroad, regardless of whether they are eligible to vote in Curaçao, to vote at 
general meetings.  
1028
 Charter PS, Articles 7 and 14. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
169 
CURAÇAO 
 

 
Curaçao’s political parties appear to be insufficiently able to ensure that the interests of all 
are adequately represented in the political sphere.  
The most recent elections resulted in a comparatively high level of voter turnout. Approximately 76 
per cent of those eligible turned up to cast their votes in the elections of October 2012, whereas 
voter turnout for both island and country elections in 2006, 2007 and 2010 constituted roughly 65 
1039
per cent. The high turnout was in part attributed to the fact that, prior to the elections, political 
parties themselves as well as civil organisations underscored the importance of (those) elections 
and put in extra efforts to mobilise people to cast their votes. The fact that people did in practice 
show up in comparatively large numbers suggests they indeed perceived a choice. In this sense, 
political parties do appear able to represent at least some of the relevant social interests.  
However, those interviewed in the course of the assessment in general did not volunteer many 
favourable opinions about political parties. Several people pointed out that affiliation with a political 
party is often seen as a liability. Many try to avoid politics – or in some cases, even elections – afraid 
that its bad name will rub off. In large part, this is to be understood against the background of a 
dynamic political landscape, with changing coalitions in which today’s small majority governing the 
country may be tomorrow’s large minority in Parliament. According to several experts interviewed, in 
practice this has translated itself in a political system in which today’s winners – backed up by their 
families, business partners, party financers and their electorate – try to make ample use of the 
legislative and executive power temporarily granted to further their own or other specific interests. 
When one or a few members of Parliament withdraw their support of the ruling government, the 
odds change, and new people, representing other specific interests, take over. In practice, of 
course, the situation is not as clear-cut, and there are many shades of grey, including several 
positive examples as well. Nevertheless, it was felt the rights of the large minority are insufficiently 
safeguarded, and Parliament is currently insufficiently able to adequately represent ‘the entire 
1040
people of Curaçao’, as it is constitutionally required to do. Also, policies aimed at the longer term 
are difficult to realise, because they can easily be overturned once the next government moves in.  
This is not always considered to be a problem because many in Curaçao see at least some fairness 
in a concept which allows some to profit in one period, and others in the next. However, more 
recently, several people do perceive a loophole in the current electoral system, and attribute the lack 
of political stability and concrete results to the fact that individual members of Parliament are 
constitutionally required to operate without mandate or instruction, and cannot be bound by party 
political rules. Others stress that it is not so much the electoral system but the democratic practice 
which fails. Thus, one expert interviewed signaled that Curaçao’s parliamentary democracy has not 
evolved into a system which represents the voters. To obtain a more stable democratic system, 
what is lacking is not a constitutionally-embedded party political mandate and a tighter bond 
between coalition parties and the Executive, but a constructive awareness that today’s majority can 
be tomorrow’s minority, requiring those with legislative and executive power to take due account of 
the rights of minorities and, in doing so, the rights of all Curaçao people. 
 
Anti-corruption commitment 
Score: 25 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DO POLITICAL PARTIES GIVE DUE ATTENTION TO PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY AND THE FIGHT 
AGAINST CORRUPTION? 
 
Corruption and the importance of public accountability are issues regularly addressed by 
 
1039
 www.kse.cw [accessed 19 May 2013]. 
1040
 Constitution, Article 39. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
171 
CURAÇAO 
 

VII.11 MEDIA 
STRUCTURE AND ORGANISATION 
Curaçao has a large number of different types of media entities. Newspapers, radio and television 
stations and online news sites provide a variety of news angles to the public. There are six 
1042
newspapers in the Papiamentu language (Extra, Bala, La Prensa, Nobo, Ulitmo Noticia and 
1043
Vigilante), and two newspapers in the Dutch language (Amigoe and Antilliaans Dagblad). There 
are 29 radio stations in Curaçao, most of which broadcast in Papiamentu (including Z-86 Radio, 
Direct 107.1, Kòrsou FM, Radio Hoyer, Radio Krioyo, Radio Mas ) and a few Dutch radio stations 
(Dolfijn FM, Paradise FM, Radio Hoyer 2). As far as we could determine in this assessment, all 
Curaçao print and radio media are in private hands. 
 
1044
Curaçao has two television stations, of which TeleCuraçao is a public-private partnership. The 
station is subsidised by the state-owned telecom provider UTS, but has over the years also become 
dependent on advertising revenue. The other television station, CBA, is privately owned. The Dutch-
based Radio Netherlands Worldwide (RNW) has for years provided locally-produced content for its 
media partners in Curaçao. In 2010 this culminated in Aworaki, a Curaçao-based internet news site 
in Papiamentu and Dutch, which had to be downsized and taken over by the Dutch broadcast 
1045
organisation NTR because a large part of RNW’s public funding was cut in 2012. In addition, a 
number of journalists work as foreign correspondents for Dutch media from Curaçao at any given 
time. Along with Dutch journalists who fly into Curaçao for specific stories, the foreign 
correspondents provide a constant and direct link with Dutch media.  
 
In addition to the traditional media consisting of newspapers, radio and television; internet and social 
media sites have become increasingly prevalent in Curaçaoan society, as a large group of 
1046
Curaçaoans now use online news sites and Facebook to stay up on the latest news. 
 
This chapter mainly discusses the two most popular and influential types of media in Curaçao, that 
is, newspapers and radio stations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1042
 Morning newspaper since 1976. 
1043
 Founded by the Catholic Church in 1883. 
1044
 Founded in 1960 
1045
 ‘Changes broadcaster’ (Hervorming publiek omroep) www.rijksoverheid.nl [accessed 28 May 2013]. 
1046
 Although there are no hard figures about social media use, experts confirm intensive use of social 
media in Curaçao.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
173 
CURAÇAO 
 

Resources (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE DIVERSE INDEPENDENT MEDIA PROVIDING A VARIETY OF PERSPECTIVES? 
 
 
Although there are different types of media sources, due to inadequate financial support and 
an insufficient number of trained journalists, the media do not provide a variety of 
perspectives covering the entire political and social spectrum. For both broadcast and print 
media, there is a financial threshold.  
Interviewees described the print and broadcasting sector as diverse and pluralistic, covering a broad 
political and social spectrum. But in practice, this often concerns politically-based news, which 
makes up the majority of the news stories in Curaçao. However, according to one media expert, the 
media seem to cover the two extremes of the political spectrum, representing the views held over 
the constitutional referendum of 2009 when people were asked to choose between ‘Si’ (approval of 
the negotiated agreements between Curaçao and the Netherlands) or ‘No’ (disapproval of the on-
going process of constitutional reform). Interviewees argued that while these two extremes (also 
called ‘establishment’ versus ‘non-establishment’) are amply covered by different media outlets, 
news angles and opinions that are more nuanced or ‘in between’ are likely to get less coverage. In 
this context, news which is deemed ‘politically neutral’, for example on music, sports, and art, is well 
covered in newspapers However, a true variety of perspectives is lacking as very few penetrating 
1053
questions are asked by journalists.  
Interviewees consider the situation regarding news media in Curaçao generally unsatisfactory. The 
number of different media entities is so high, that supply exceeds demand. According to experts, 
competition is often not determined by quality, but by the availability of resources. In terms of 
resources, the media face at least two challenges: inadequate financial support and an insufficient 
number of trained journalists, despite the presence of some who are qualified.   
With regard to the first point, inadequate financial support, Curaçao media entities face considerable 
financial challenges. In the first place, there are financial hurdles involved in establishing a 
broadcast station or a newspaper. Purchasing equipment and licences can be costly, which means 
that in practice those that do are often dependent on financiers and/or advertisers. The print and 
radio sectors do not receive government funding. Interviewees consider that profitable media 
companies are rare, while most companies have a history of financial problems and struggle to 
survive. The large advertising market is a major factor preventing media organisations from going 
bankrupt. According to interviewees, this situation also makes the media dependent on advertisers. 
Furthermore, as one of the respondents stated, on the business side, some media organisations do 
not abide by the law by not paying taxes and social security for their employees, which leads to 
unfair competition.  
With respect to the second point, an insufficient number of trained journalists, there are considerable 
problems in terms of professionalism of media employees. There are only a handful of journalists 
with a professional background in journalism. Most professional journalists are employed in the 
public sector or corporate business sector, in the marketing department, or as communication and 
public relations officers. Fortunately, other professionals with research skills, such as social 
scientists, are increasingly opting for a function in the media business. According to those 
interviewed, it is as yet uncertain if professional journalism training would remedy all the problems 
facing the Curaçao media today. They argue that most people already working as journalists believe 
they do not need additional training, while younger people tend to look to the Netherlands for 
education.  
 
1053
 Froukje Sijtsma ‘Media laws in Curacao’ (Mediawetgeving op Curaçao. Een onderzoek naar hoe 
hoofdredacteuren van Curaçaose nieuwsmedia denken over journalistieke zelfregulering in de vorm van 
een mediaraad), University of Groningen, thesis, 2012: 47. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
175 
CURAÇAO 
 

1061
The Freedom of Information Act (Landsverordening Openbaarheid van Bestuur) provides 
journalists and others access to governmental information. Information will not be provided if, among 
other things, the interest of providing the information does not weigh up to the interest which 
concerns the investigation and prosecution of criminal facts, the inspection, control and supervision 
1062
by administrative bodies or the observance of a private life.  
 
Independence (practice) 
Score: 25 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THE MEDIA FREE FROM UNWARRANTED EXTERNAL INTERFERENCE IN THEIR WORK IN 
PRACTICE? 
 
 
Private ownership of media and subsequent financial problems lead to dependence on the 
government, on the financiers and on revenue from advertising. This has severe 
consequences for the content of the news. 
In practice, as far as we could assess, there is no direct government censorship, but according to 
media experts ‘subtle influence’ does occur in Curaçao. As noted above, media companies do 
depend to a large extent on financiers and the advertising market. Interviewees consider that the 
polarised political spectrum is tightly linked to the economic landscape, and therefore to businesses 
and advertising revenue. Those interviewed argued that state-owned companies (Overheids NVs) 
play a crucial role in this respect by, for example, issuing advertisements on a regular basis. As 
noted in the above, the indirect funding of state-owned companies and private companies pose a 
considerable risk to the independence of the media, while polarisation and partisanship of the media 
1063
hinders the development of independent journalism. 
To the extent that ownership is known, the owner is sometimes linked to either a political party or 
ideology or business. One media expert argues that in this sense many independent media 
consumers – a small group, as the population is often divided along the same lines as the politicians 
and businesses – choose to read papers and listen to radio stations with knowledge of this ideology 
or political leaning in mind. In addition, the media expert considers that without this knowledge, 
articles or news reports may at times seem unintelligible to people outside of Curaçao, as most of 
the ‘news’ is actually written ‘between the lines’. 
Transparency International didn’t find evidence of systematic intimidation and harassment of 
journalists, although threats and physical violence against journalists, by for instance politicians, has 
1064 1065
occurred recently, as well as in the past. According to experts, a climate of fear exists 
amongst journalists interested in pursuing controversial topics, particularly those related to 
corruption. In this context, the area of investigative journalism is virtually non-existent in Curaçao 
(see section on Role, ‘Investigate and expose cases of corruption practice’, below). Experts also 
highlighted that Curaçaoan-based journalists often practice self-censorship – even when not actually 
threatened – to ensure a more pleasant climate to carry on with their personal lives on the island.  
The Freedom of Information Act (Landsverordening Openbaarheid van Bestuur – LOB) gives 
individuals the right to public sector information. However, interviewees expressed their concerns 
regarding the effectiveness of the Freedom of Information Act (LOB) and the willingness of the 
 
government to provide information. Often the information requested by journalists is not provided in 
 
1061
 Country ordinance Freedom of information Act (LOB), AB 2010, No.87.  
1062
 Ibid, Article 11. 
1063
 Sijtsma, 2012, p.29. 
1064
 Car fire journalist on purpose, 28 May 2013, via www.kkcuracao.com [accessed 29 May 2013]. 
1065
 ‘Journalist brutually pushed aside’ (Journalist hardhandig opzij geschoven), 20 September 2012 via 
www.kkcuracao.com [accessed 21 May 2013]. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
177 
CURAÇAO 
 

The extent to which media companies are transparent about their ownership, decision-making and 
policies ranges from extensive transparency (‘everybody knows who is the owner’) to complete 
opacity. Media entities in Curaçao are not ‘big’, as described above, and do not publish any financial 
information. In general, media entities do not publish any internal information at all, such as annual 
reports and information on their ownership and editorial policies. Only a few media entities publish 
names of journalists and contact information on their website.  
The information that broadcast companies have to provide to the Bureau Telecommunication and 
Post is, as far as we could determine in this assessment, except for the names of licencees, not 
public.  
 
Accountability (law) 
Score: 25 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE LEGAL PROVISIONS TO ENSURE THAT MEDIA OUTLETS ARE ANSWERABLE FOR THEIR 
ACTIVITIES? 
 
 
Broadcast media do have some provisions in place to ensure accountability on (mostly) 
technical aspects. There are no provisions for print media. 
The broadcasting regulatory authority for ‘Telecommunications and Postal matters’ is overseen by 
the minister of transport and communication, and is supervised by the state secretary of transport 
and communication. One of the tasks of the organisation includes the enforcement of laws and 
regulations related to telecommunications, and ensuring that the infrastructures under its authority 
comply with certain standards. For instance, broadcast media are obliged to tape all their 
broadcasts. 
Within the framework of the law the regulator has the ability to ask questions of the broadcast 
1071
media, to review their annual reports and accounts, and to conduct an on-site inspection. If the 
broadcast entities do not comply with the requirements, the regulator can take different measures, 
1072
such as imposing a fine and the withdrawal of the licence. 
There are neither government regulators nor professional oversight bodies for print media. There is 
no media-organised oversight body (for example self-regulation). 
In case of the spreading of false or erroneous information by the press about a person or legal 
entity, media companies can – at the request of the person or legal entity – be tried by a civil 
1073
court. The court decision may include a deadline for correction and/or requirements for the 
manner in which the corrections should take place. In case of criminal insults, the person involved 
also has the possibility to report this to the public prosecutor, who can decide to start a prosecution.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
1071
 Country ordinance on telecommunication service, 2011, No.37, Article 31a. 
1072
 Ibid, Chapter IX, Strafbepalingen. 
1073
 Civil Code Book 6, A.B. 2010, No.86-87, Title 3, Onrechtmatige daad.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
179 
CURAÇAO 
 

One of the tasks of the broadcasting regulatory authority ‘Telecommunications and Postal matters’ 
includes ensuring that radio and television broadcasts adhere to ethical codes of communication; 
therefore a delay/interruption device must be installed, to censor non-acceptable expressions. 
1076
A minister of the political party PAR (Omayra Leeflang) launched an initiative in 2007 to stop so-
called ‘call-in programmes’ through which citizens voice their opinions – often in harsh and offensive 
terms – about local politics and society at large. The minister’s media regulation (mediawet) also 
called for sanctions to be placed on radio stations which didn’t abide by general moral rules. The 
1077
regulation was not well received in the Antillean parliament and was never put into effect. 
 
Integrity (practice) 
Score: 25 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE INTEGRITY OF MEDIA EMPLOYEES ENSURED IN PRACTICE? 
 
 
There is a fragmented and reactive approach to ensuring the integrity of employees of media 
organisations. 
 
According to interviewees, overall, broadcasters and newspapers do not seem to have integrity 
provisions in practice. No integrity provisions could be found on broadcasters’ or newspaper’s 
websites. However, there are some exceptions, for instance, the news site Versgeperst has drafted 
1078
a code of conduct for journalists. This code states that a journalist is responsible for presenting 
news independently, fairly and honestly. This code may be related to Versgeperst’s origin, the site 
having been an initiative of Dutch journalism students from the Netherlands, where such codes are 
more commonplace.  
Overall, integrity in journalism is not a widely-discussed topic by the media themselves, although 
occasionally media companies report on the conduct of others. Due to particular incidents when, for 
1079
instance, shocking pictures or offensive language appear in the media, topics such as integrity 
1080
and ethics are discussed by journalists, but only on an irregular basis.  
Attempts at self-regulation mostly have to do with moral issues, such as in the case of a boycott of 
bloody pictures taken at traffic accidents or crime scenes appearing on the front page. This boycott 
lasted several months, until one of the newspapers decided it was costing too much.  
Respondents argue that in more recent years, journalists have become increasingly popular, with 
government appointing certain journalists on the board of supervisors of state-owned companies, 
which can be considered as a compensation for loyalty to the political party appointing them. This 
1081
development has not raised many questions in public debate. According to a media expert, this is 
symptomatic of a culture in which the community accepts that journalists are openly entertained and 
offered gifts by private companies, for example during presentations of annual reports or 
promotional campaigns. The media experts stated that various Curaçao businesses organise annual 
activities for the press corps, where journalists have dinner, are taken on boat trips and given mobile 
 
1076
 The deceased minister of Education, Stanley Lamp from the political party MAN, launched a similar 
kind of idea a few years earlier. 
1077
 ‘Media harm privacy’ (Media schendt privacy) 22 March 2010, via www.versgeperst.com [accessed 27 
May 2013]. 
1078
 Code of conduct Vers geperst, www.versgeperst.com [accessed 21 May 2013], see also: Media code 
not on the right track, (Code slechte koers) 26 September 2007, via www.abcourant.com. 
1079
 Terrible pictures of death of two young girls in hotel 24 July 2012, via www.abcourant.com [accessed: 
20 May 2013]. 
1080
 Ethics in Curaçao media (Welingelichte kringen over ethiek in de media) (RNW) 19 June 2010, via 
www.rnw.nl [accessed: 20 May 2013]. 
1081
 Sijtsma, 2012, p.31. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
181 
CURAÇAO 
 

Inform public on corruption and its impact 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THE MEDIA ACTIVE AND SUCCESSFUL IN INFORMING THE PUBLIC ON CORRUPTION AND ITS 
IMPACT ON THE COUNTRY? 
 
 
While some media outlets pay attention to informing the public on corruption and its impact, 
reports are often limited, biased and of poor quality.  
On the positive side, different corruption-related cases have been widely exposed by the media, 
especially those at state-owned companies. The so-called ‘Toko den toko’ issues, questionable 
contracts and tender procedures, irregular spending and transactions have been popular topics. 
Popular talk shows have contributed to raising the awareness level on corruption. On the other 
hand, it’s much easier and less expensive to publish or broadcast ‘quick news’, which often turns out 
not to be true and greatly damages the reputation of business and individuals in the small-scale 
1084
society, than to offer substantiated news to the public. This practice also negatively influences 
the faith and opinion of the public at large in the political arena in a broader sense.  
Most of the media do not play a significant role in educating the public on corruption, its impact on 
the country and how to curb it. A media expert stressed that indeed, media organisations are more 
geared to being run as companies for profit than to prioritising their watchdog role. By being quick to 
publish unsubstantiated reports of corruption, fraud or crime, Curaçao media add to – if not help 
create – a climate of distrust in the society of Curaçao, as well as a negative image of Curaçao 
abroad. 
 
Inform public on governance issues 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE MEDIA ACTIVE AND SUCCESSFUL IN INFORMING THE PUBLIC ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT AND OTHER GOVERNANCE ACTORS? 
 
 
The ability of the media to inform the public about activities of the government is often 
undermined by the lack of information from different sources. The effectiveness of the 
Freedom of Information Act (LOB) is low. 
In general, the media are quite active in keeping the public informed on regular activities of the 
government and governance institutions. However, there are concerns regarding the investigative 
means available to journalists because of the reticent attitude of governmental organisations. On the 
one hand, getting information or statistics or gaining access to a spokesperson can be very difficult 
for journalists. A media expert argues that this situation does not appear to be as a result of a 
deliberate code of secrecy, but seems for some media more rooted in the complex colonial past, 
where speaking out, being visible, and giving information could result in harsh punishment. 
Journalists or other outsiders trying to gain specific information can have a very difficult time. 
Moreover, as noted above, there are concerns regarding the effectiveness of the Freedom of 
 
Information Act (LOB) and the willingness of the government to provide information. (See 
Independence, practice.) At the same time, journalists with connections are able to gain insight into 
 
1084
 Sijtsma, 2012, p.27. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
183 
CURAÇAO 
 

VII.12 CIVIL SOCIETY 
STRUCTURE AND ORGANISATION  
Civil society is defined by Transparency International as the arena outside of the family, the state 
and the business sector, that is created by individual and collective action, organisations and 
institutions to advance shared interests. Curaçao citizens are active in numerous civil society 
organisations (CSOs) dealing with, amongst others, religion, culture, music, sports, charity, health 
and environment. The CSOs range in character from institutionalised and formal with a few hundred 
members and international ties, to informal, small-scale and local. The number and diversity of 
CSOs reflects the fragmentation and polarisation of civil society in Curaçao. 
1086
Traditional CSOs, like trade unions, have existed since 1922 in Curaçao and have increased in 
1087
number to more than 20 today. There are three umbrella organisations for unions, which are 
connected to international (union) organisations such as the International Trade Union 
Confederation (ITUC), the Trade Union Confederation of the Americas (TUCA) and Public Servants 
International (PSI). There is also a local Union Platform, called Plataforma Sindikal. 
Faith-based organisations are also a significant component of civil society in Curaçao. The majority 
1088
(73 per cent) of the population of Curaçao belongs to the Roman Catholic religion. The most 
important churches and faith communities are united in the umbrella organisation, the Council of 
Churches (Raad van Kerken). Several service organisations – including Rotary, the Lions Club and 
the Kiwanis – form another important element of civil society.   
 
In 1985, a small group of people, including the former premier of the Netherlands Antilles, the late 
Miguel Pourier, formed a pressure group called Foundation Shared Interest (Fundashon Kousa 
Komun), which aimed to raise awareness about good governance. In recent years, more citizens 
have become active in publicly expressing their concerns about corruption on radio or television, 
through articles in newspapers, and using social media. Since Curaçao became an independent 
country in October 2010 there has been an explosion in the establishment of new watchdog 
1089
CSOs. Although the composition of the groups is subject to change and coordination is often 
lacking, they all seem to have the same higher purpose of establishing good governance in 
Curaçao. 
This chapter focuses mainly on CSOs in Curaçao which explicitly focus on achieving good 
governance. Business associations are not included in this chapter, but are mentioned in Chapter 
VII.13 Business.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1086
 Bishop Verriet established the first union: Liga St. Telmo for harbour labourers. 
1087
 Central General Trahadonan di Corsow (CGTC), Sentral Sindikato Korsou (SSK) and Kamara 
Sindikal (KS). 
1088
 The other religions are: Protestant, Pinkstergemeente, Adventist, Jehovah’s witnesses and other 
religions, CBS Census 2011. (Willemstad: Central Bureau of Statistics Curaçao, 2011). 
1089
 Such as: Kòrsou Uní, Grupo di Avila, Kòrsou 40, Pro Pueblo, Frente Sivíl, Defensa Sivil, Akshon Sivíl.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
185 
CURAÇAO 
 

 
The tax system is favourable for CSOs as long as they don’t operate as a business for profit. The 
provisions for businesses to make donations to CSOs are also favourable as long these donations 
concern marketing. There are provisions in place to allow individuals to make tax-deductible 
donations, with a threshold of approximately two per cent of the taxable income. 
 
Resources (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DO CSOs HAVE ADEQUATE FINANCIAL AND HUMAN RESOURCES TO FUNCTION AND OPERATE 
EFFECTIVELY? 
 
Despite the financial help of donor organisations and other financiers, most CSOs tend to 
have inadequate financial and human resources, which leads to a certain degree of 
ineffectiveness. This issue is generally less of a concern for associations, such as unions, 
that collect membership fees.  
There are a few well-known donor organisations in Curaçao which support local civil society 
initiatives with funds from the Netherlands. The Collaborative Foundations (Stichting 
1097
Samenwerkende Fondsen) is one of them. In particular, they provide financial contributions to 
initiatives arising from society itself; projects that combat poverty and which offer better social and 
economic opportunities to inhabitants. In 2011 the Collaborative Foundations invested over € 1.5 
million in more than 50 social initiatives in the Dutch Caribbean islands. Another well-known donor 
1098
organisation in Curaçao is a foundation called Prins Bernhard Cultuurfonds Caribbean. The aim 
of this foundation is to support local activities, for example in the cultural, social and educational 
sector. Also Bon Intenshon is well known. This local private initiative wishes to bring the island to the 
attention of the greater global community by organizing, for example, international music and film 
events. Moreover, charitable projects to mitigate the impact of general poverty are all objectives of 
1099
the foundation.  
The foundations noted above are just three examples of donor organisations in Curaçao. In practice 
there are more, but an overview of the number of donor organisations and their activities is lacking. 
This in general applies to the civil society in Curaçao. Due to a lack of empirical research it is also 
difficult to assess how strong the volunteer and membership base of CSOs overall is in Curaçao. 
According to a union expert, the participation rate of workers with unions is about 28 per cent in 
Curaçao. 
Despite the existence of donor organisations in Curaçao, several CSOs are generally not eligible for 
financing from such donors because they don’t meet their objectives and/or requirements. They are 
largely dependent on membership fees, income from fundraising activities (for example car washes, 
lotteries and parties), and private and business funding. Interviewees stated that it takes a lot of time 
to get financing together. One watchdog-CSO expert experienced that financiers are in general 
willing to invest small amounts of money, but don’t want to commit themselves to large amounts. 
Business experts argued that local businesses donate sometimes hundreds of thousands of guilders 
to CSOs. Also, other interviewees from the business sector stressed the fact that for reasons of 
insufficient government investment in ‘basic needs’ – such as education, child care, sports and 
culture – the private sector is frequently approached for financial assistance. Without its financial 
help, many CSOs would have much less to spend.  
 
1097
 The Collaborative Foundations consists of Stichting Kinderpostzegels Nederland, the Oranje Fonds, 
Skanfonds, the Innovatiefonds Zorgverzekeraars and the Sluyterman van Loo Foundation, via 
www.samenwerkendefondsen.org [accessed 30 April 2013]. 
1098
See www.pbccaribbean.com [accessed 30 April 2013]. 
1099
 See www.fundashonbonintenshon.org [accessed 30 April 2013]. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
187 
CURAÇAO 
 

Independence (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT CAN CIVIL SOCIETY EXIST AND FUNCTION WITHOUT UNDUE EXTERNAL INTERFERENCE? 
 
Although there have been no examples of direct government interference in the operations of 
CSOs, there have been several reports of recent attempts to intimidate (individual members) 
of watchdog CSOs. 
CSOs in Curaçao are generally able to operate without undue interference by the authorities. 
Instances of direct government pressure, such as suspension of CSOs or arrest of CSO activists 
because of their work, do not take place. On the negative side, interviewees consider that, in 
practice, people often fear association with watchdog CSOs. For instance, they fear losing their job 
or being excluded from public contracts. (Also refer to Chapter IV. Country Profile.) As a result of 
this, according to respondents, members of watchdog CSOs are often financially-independent 
people or retired people who no longer depend on employment income.  
The authorities do not interfere openly in the internal affairs of CSOs, but in a few cases one or more 
ministers openly showed their antipathy. For instance, in 2012 the Prime Minister hit out at pressure 
 1106
groups when they intended to organise a demonstration. Another example concerns the debate 
1107
on the report of the Commission Rosenmöller in Parliament. The Commission investigated the 
causes and developments that have led to a situation where the integrity of public officials and the 
functioning of important institutions in Curaçao have been questioned. To gather information the 
Commission conducted 40 interviews, where the interviewees remained anonymous. During the 
discussion of the report in the Parliament, a minister accused the people who had spoken with the 
1108
Rosenmöller Committee to be traitors to their country. On account of these accusations a former 
Island Council member initiated a pressure group called ‘I’m also one of the 40’, also called the 
Group of 40. The group openly expressed support for the respondents of the committee. Several 
protest demonstrations were organised and the Group of 40 requested that Parliament reopen the 
discussion on the Rosenmöller-report Committee. This recommendation received substantial 
support, for instance, from the political party Pais, but also from Kòrsou Uní, a CSO of social 
partners on the island.  
Moreover, during the campaign period of the elections in October 2012, there were cases of 
1109
intimidation (verbal attacks) and violence by politicians against members of watchdog CSOs. 
Some CSO leaders experienced inexplicably high tax assessments which they interpreted as 
intimidation by the government. Furthermore, during the tumultuous period just before October 
1110
2012, the advertising billboards of watchdog CSOs were destroyed several times. The 
perpetrators are not known.  
Authorities also have been criticised for attempting to influence CSOs’ activities through 
‘discriminatory’ policies. For instance, interviewees considered cooperation of the government within 
1111
Kolaborativo, the social dialogue platform of Curaçao established in 2003, to be non-existent. 
This platform, which is organised according to the International Labour Organization (ILO) protocol, 
 
1106
 Prime minister hits out at pressure groups (Premier haalt uit naar actiegroepen), 20 April 2012, via 
www.kkCuraçao.com [accessed 31 May 2013]. 
1107
 Do it yourselves (Doe het zelf), Commission of research, 30 September 2011. 
1108
 Addressing traitors by the constitution (Landverraders bij grondwet aanpakken) 15 October 2011, via 
www.rnw.nl [accessed 31 May 2013]. 
1109
 ‘Intimidation is unacceptable’ (Intimidatie is onacceptabel), 9 October 2012, via www.versgeperst.com 
[accessed 31 May 2013]. 
1110
 ‘Ads Frente Sivil destroyed again’, 24 September 2012, via www.Curaçaochronicle.com [accessed 9 
May 2013]. 
1111
 The term ‘social dialogue’ reflects the Constitutional principle of tripartism of the ILO (International 
Labour Organization).  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
189 
CURAÇAO 
 

websites include the articles of incorporation, the names of board members, relevant reports and 
1116
public letters.  
In the period just before the October 2012 elections, watchdog CSOs engaged in an extensive 
campaign with billboards, radio spots, media performances and newsletters. The campaign was 
aimed to influence the voting behavior of the people of Curaçao. According to those interviewed, the 
CSOs opted not to disclose information about the funding sources of those campaign activities. 
Certainly in that period, there was a growing call for transparency in the financing of CSOs in 
Curaçao public and political debate. 
 
Accountability (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE CSOs ANSWERABLE TO THEIR CONSTITUENCIES? 
 
CSO boards and members are only partially effective in providing oversight of CSO 
management decisions.  
Most CSOs observe principles of democracy and accountability in their formal internal structures. 
The law ensures that within associations all members are given an opportunity on an annual basis to 
1117
control the financial position and business activity of its executive committee. Regarding 
foundations, if there are doubts about the compliance with the statutes, the law gives the right to key 
1118
stakeholders and the public prosecutor to ask the board for information any time. 
On the positive side, an expert interviewed noted that effective accountability mechanisms are often 
imposed by donors. The expert argued that donors are generally successful in performing this 
function, and the CSOs usually report to them and provide them with the relevant documents, 
because they would otherwise face the prospect of being denied funding in the future. Also, unions 
succeed, to varying degrees, in answering for their decisions to key stakeholders and members. For 
instance, some unions do exert strong supervision of board decisions, while others do not. A union 
expert emphasised that the level of professionalism of the union is decisive here.  
On the negative side, several CSOs face a number of dilemmas when it comes to a professional 
approach and transparent and timely reporting. The preparation of a good annual report takes 
considerable time which is often needed for other core tasks, and is often not available in the case 
of the many volunteer-led CSOs. 
 
Integrity (practice) 
Score: 25 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE INTEGRITY OF CSOs ENSURED IN PRACTICE? 
 
In practice most CSOs in Curaçao are based on trust, and they have a rather reactive 
approach to ensuring integrity of their staff and members. 
 
1116
 See, for example, www.stichtingsmoc.nl and www.akshonsivil.com [accessed 8 May 2013]. 
1117
 Cf. Civil Code, Book 2, Article 89. 
1118
 Ibid. Article 54. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
191 
CURAÇAO 
 

carried out various court proceedings to achieve this. According to a CSO expert, because the 
government has systematically tried to boycott the court proceedings and several times has failed to 
carry out the court rulings, the effectiveness of the actions of the CSO are limited.  
Policy reform (practice) 
Score: 75 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS CIVIL SOCIETY ACTIVELY ENGAGED IN POLICY REFORM INITATIVES ON ANTI-CORRUPTION? 
 
In recent years a limited number of CSOs have provided input to on-going anti-corruption 
discussions. The role of these watchdog CSOs changed from ‘talking and writing’ to a more 
active advocacy-based approach, using legal instruments to hold the government 
accountable. The watchdog CSOs became more visible and gained support from other CSOs. 
It is illuminating that it took a comparatively long time in Curaçao, until the country got its status of 
autonomy in 2010, for watchdog CSOs to become visible in Curaçao. Although watchdog agencies 
such as Kousa Komun tried since the 1980s to raise awareness about good governance, they never 
organised large public meetings or demonstrations to demand it. As one interviewee stated, ‘in 
those days, certain groups in society, the intellectuals, didn’t go on the street to raise awareness’. 
However, things started to change in the early 2000s. A few years ago, a demonstration was 
organised against criminality, and more recently an anti-corruption demonstration was organised by 
the politician, the late Helmin Wiels. After October 2010, the subject of corruption became a more 
‘public issue’. Since the installation of the first Government of Curaçao, Cabinet-Schotte, and in 
particular, since the recent murder (May 2013) of political leader Wiels, discussions about 
democratic values such as freedom of speech have become very topical. As one of the respondents 
said, ‘Democracy in Curaçao is more alive than ever’. 
Moreover, the Council of Churches (Raad van Kerken) has for many years been asking for attention 
to be focused on good governance and anti-corruption. The Council undertook several initiatives in 
relation to those topics. In the run-up to the elections of October 2012 (and also fora long time 
before), the board of the Council called for peace and respect, asked for commitment to the fight 
1121
against corruption in all ranks of society, and for unity and peace on the island.  
During 2011 and 2012 a pressure group, Civil Front (Frente Sivil) – an informal association – 
became well known. According to interviewees, the aim of the group is to improve the quality of 
public administration, government corporations and institutions. The pressure group organised 
numerous demonstrations and campaigns against Cabinet-Schotte and used large advertising signs 
with different messages concerning the way the government ruled the country. Furthermore, 
organisations, including some unions, explicitly showed support for the activities of Frente Sivil and 
1122
Akshon Sivil. 
1123
In July 2012 Frente Sivíl founded a Civil Action Foundation (Fundashon Akshon Sivíl – FAS). 
This pressure group receives judicial support of several lawyers in Curaçao and makes use of legal 
instruments to reach its goals. According to experts, the aim of Fundashon Akshon Sivíl is to reach 
good governance by using legal instruments. Fundashon Akshon Sivíl initiated for the first time in 
1124
Curaçao a civil inquiry request. This concerns the policy and state of affairs at four state-owned 
 
1121
 ‘Message Council of Churches Curaçao’, Mensahe di konseho di iglesianan Korsou pa elekshon di 
oktober 2012, via www.qracao.com [accessed 6 May 2013]. 
1122
 Frente Sivil receives support from the unions (Frente Sivil krijgt onverwachts steun van vakbonden en 
dwingt cabinet Schotte snelle aftocht uit Fort Amsterdam) 21 July 2012, via www.news.caribseek.com 
[accessed 8 May 2013]. 
1123
 See www.akshonsivil.com [accessed 8 May 2013]. 
1124
 Civil Code, Book 2, Article 271. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
193 
CURAÇAO 
 

VII.13 BUSINESS 
STRUCTURE AND ORGANISATION 
According to figures from the Curaçao Chamber of Commerce and Industry, 38,054 entities – 
including companies, foundations and associations – were registered in Curaçao as of 31 December 
1128
2012, which concerns 40 per cent international registrations and 60 per cent local registrations. 
This number of local companies implies an average of one entity for every seven residents of 
Curaçao. In 2012, just over 3,000 new entities were registered, which is 13 per cent less than in 
2011.  
In the national accounts, financial intermediation has the largest share in gross value added of the 
private sector (24 per cent) because of the prominent presence of the international financial services 
industry in Curaçao. Financial intermediation is followed by real estate, renting and business 
activities (18 per cent), trade (14 per cent), transport, storage and communications (10 per cent), 
and manufacturing (9 per cent). It should be noted that tourism is one of the main economic 
activities in Curaçao, but it is not considered a separate sector in the national accounts. Therefore, 
tourism activities are spread over various sectors, the most important of which are: hotels and 
restaurants, trade, transport, storage and communications, real estate, renting and business 
1129
activities. According to information from the Central Bank of Curaçao and Sint Maarten, tourism 
1130
was the largest contributor (21 per cent) to the foreign exchange income of 2011. 
The Curaçao Chamber of Commerce and Industry keeps a database of Curaçao businesses, and 
provides information and services to local and international companies with an interest in doing 
business in Curaçao. The Chamber is officially represented in several official bodies where financial, 
1131
social and economic policy and developments are discussed and determined. 
Curaçao has a very active business society community. There are a number of business (lobby) 
groups and organisations in Curaçao, for example, the Business Association Curaçao (VBC) which 
represents about 265 businesses and the Small and Medium Enterprises Association (ADECK) 
which represents about 200 businesses. Three-quarters of the companies in Curaçao are medium-
sized enterprises. The financial sector is represented by, amongst several others, the Curaçao 
International Financial Services Association (CIFA), the Curaçao Bankers Association (CBA) and 
the Association of International Bankers (IBA). The tourist sector is represented by the Curaçao 
Hospitality and Tourism Association (CHATA). Other business associations are the Antillean 
Contractors Association (AVV) and the Free Zone Association (Frezacur). All associations organise 
business-related events for their members. Some also undertake research or provide training for 
their members, and lobby government on their behalf. 
In the same waym employees of businesses are generally organised per sector in labour unions. As 
noted in Chapter VII.12 Civil Society, the labour unions are organised into three federations of 
labour unions: Central General Trahadonan di Corsow (CGTC), Sentral Sindikato Korsou (SSK) and 
Kamara Sindikal. In 2013, approximately 28 per cent of workers were members of a union.  
Besides the business and employee organisations and the branch of industry organisations, 
professional organisations play an important role in the private sector. That holds, for example, for 
 
1128
 Curaçao Chamber of Commerce and Industry Reporting and statistics, 2013, based on country 
ordinance Commercial register (Handelsregisterbesluit), Official Curaçao Gazette, 2010, No.86-87. 
1129
 CFATF, Mutual Evaluation Report Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism, 
Curaçao, (s.l.: CFATF, June 2012). 
1130
 Presentation Annual report Central Bank Curaçao and Sint Maarten 2011, slide 34. 
1131
 See www.Curaçao-chamber.an. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
195 
CURAÇAO 
 

1136
of Curaçao. The third step concerns the obtaining of a licence for the managing directors to act 
as such and a licence to carry out business. Pursuant to the Business Establishment Rules 
1137
(Vestigingsregeling voor bedrijven) an establishment licence application can be denied in the 
interest of public policy and also, if in the opinion of the government of Curaçao, the public interest 
1138
so dictates. Foreign legal entities also have the possibility request a business licence from the 
government for the purpose of establishing a branch of the foreign legal entity to conduct a business 
in Curaçao.  
For certain types of companies it is necessary to receive an additional licence to operate from one of 
the authorities or supervisors. This applies to companies such as bars and restaurants, 
pharmaceutical companies, and financial institutions. In addition, special licences can also be 
required for personnel, such as residence and working permits. Regarding the dismissal of 
personnel, in certain cases the employer needs the approval of the director of the Ministry of Labour 
Affairs and has to file a request.  
1139
Intellectual property rights are protected by law in Curaçao. A trademark owner can only claim 
exclusive rights to a trademark if the concerned trademark is duly registered for Curaçao with the 
1140
Bureau for Intellectual Property (Bureau voor Intellectuele Eigendom – BIP). The current 
legislation does not provide for an opposition procedure with the BIP. Protection of a trademark lasts 
for 10 years following the date of application. In case of infringement, the owner of a trademark 
which is registered with the BIP can go to Court, and claim, for instance, injunctive relief, payment of 
profits or seizure of the infringing goods.  
As noted in Chapter VII.4 Public Sector, since the change in constitutional relations there is no 
1141
legislation to regulate public procurement. However, the ministers agreed to act in accordance 
with the legislative framework and the underlying administrative regulations in place prior to October 
2010, which implies open bidding as the general method of public procurement, and closed bidding 
below certain estimated contract sums. There is no legislation to regulate private-to-private 
procurement. 
Most agreements are formalised in officially-signed contracts. Civil law provisions provide adequate 
1142
enforcement rights regarding contracts. However, some agreements are oral agreements. Good 
faith plays an important role in civil law disputes. According to interviewees, the generally accepted 
standards within economic life are the most important norm for a judge: what is reasonable for a 
citizen to expect (trust principle).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1136
 Business Establishment Rules (Vestigingsregeling voor bedrijven ), Official Curaçao Gazette 1946, 
No.43 and Country Decree, Official Curaçao Gazette, 1978, No.347. 
1137
 Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Doing business in Curaçao guide, information provided June 
2013. 
1138
 See www.doingbusinessdutchcaribbean.com [accessed 2 June 2013]. 
1139
 Country ordinance authors (Auteursverordening) Official Curaçao Gazette 1913 No.3, country 
ordinance brandnames (Merkenlandsverordening) Official Curaçao Gazette 1996, no.188. 
1140
 Office for intellectual property (Bureau voor Intellectuele Eigendom) www.bip.an [accessed 2 June 
2013]. 
1141
 Country ordinance Government accounts 2010 (Landsverordening Comptabiliteitsvoorschriften), 
Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, No. Article 27.  
1142
 Civil Code Book 6, Contract-law (Verbintenissenrecht).  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
197 
CURAÇAO 
 

Governance 
 
Independence (law) 
Score: 75 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE LEGAL SAFEGUARDS TO PREVENT UNWARRANTED EXTERNAL INTERFERENCE IN 
ACTIVITIES OF PRIVATE BUSINESSES? 
 
 
There are comprehensive legal safeguards to prevent unwarranted external interference in 
the activities of private businesses. 
In general, the granting of licences or permits is based upon criteria. Some of these criteria are well 
defined, others leave room for interpretation. Civil servants determine whether the criteria are met; 
thus decisions are ultimately subject to interpretation by officials. Civil servants may be – but are not 
necessarily – prohibited from being a board member or a shareholder of companies, foundations 
and associations which regularly come or may come into contact with the public administration unit 
1148
in question.  
In all cases involving a decision of a governmental organisation, it is possible to start an appeal 
1149
procedure (Landsverordening Administratieve rechtspraak – LAR-procedure). 
The regulations on tax audits are reasonable. A taxpayer will usually be notified about an upcoming 
audit three weeks in advance and the inspection should take place during office hours. An urgent 
audit can be carried out without an advance notification, but only for specific reasons regarding 
1150
general principles of good governance. An investigation in a home is only allowed with the 
permission of the resident or the permission of the public prosecutor. Taxpayers can file a complaint 
regarding actions and decisions of the tax authorities with the tax authorities themselves or through 
1151
the tax court.  
There is, however, no competition authority in place to enforce fair competition and to investigate 
cartels, approve or reject mergers and acquisitions, and promote competition through the publication 
1152
of guidance notes and other advocacy activity. However, legislation to establish such authority is 
1153
at an advanced stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1148
 Country ordinance Legal and material rights and obligations of civil servants (Landsverordening 
materieel ambtenarenrecht), Official Curaçao Gazette 2010,Ibid., Article 54-55 
1149
 Ibid. 
1150
 Supreme Court 8 January 1986, BNB 1986/128 
1151
 General ordinance national taxes (Algemene landsverordening landsbelastingen), Country Gazette, 
2010, no.86 and Articles 29 and 31.  
1152
 Competition authority to be established (Mededingingsautoriteit in oprichting), 26 March 2013, via 
www.versgeperst.com [accessed 5 May 2013]. 
1153
 Staten van Curaçao zitting 2011-2012,  Landsverordening inzake concurrentie.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
199 
CURAÇAO 
 

Transparency (law) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE PROVISIONS TO ENSURE TRANSPARENCY IN THE ACTIVITIES OF THE BUSINESS 
SECTOR? 
 
 
There are no disclosure rules for businesses to make their accounts and other information 
publicly available. Financial institutions have to publish a summary of their financial 
statements.  
As a general provision in Curaçao’s corporate law, all legal entities – including foundations and 
private foundations that are not running an enterprise – must maintain a proper administration and 
prepare financial statements, containing at least an annual balance sheet, a profit and loss account 
1157
and explanatory notes. In case a foundation carries out commercial activities, it is subject to profit 
tax. All financial institutions supervised by the Central Bank of Curaçao and Sint Maarten (see also 
Chapter VII.14 Supervision Institutions Private Sector) are obliged to compile financial statements in 
accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). IFRS is a reporting standard 
that requires that values are measured at fair value, that is, the market value or the best estimate of 
the market value. 
Businesses are not required by law to make any of their reports and recommendations known to the 
general public. Only large limited liability companies (NVs) have a legal obligation to make the 
1158
financial statements available to their stakeholders. A company is considered ‘large’ if it complies 
with the following three criteria: more than 20 employees in Curaçao, an asset value of the company 
of more than NAf 5 million (US$ 2.8 million) and a net asset which exceeds NAf 10 million (US$ 5.6 
1159
million). In addition, the Central Bank of Curaçao and Sint Maarten requires that banks and 
insurance companies publish a summary of their financial statements in the newspaper and/or their 
1160
website, the so-called ‘Consolidated Financial Highlights’.  
According to a banking expert, full banking examinations take place approximately every five years, 
although in the years between, other supervision examination activities take place. Those 
examinations focus, for example, on certain departments or laws, such as IT security or compliance 
with anti-money-laundering regulations.  
 
Transparency (practice) 
Score: 25 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THERE TRANSPARENCY IN THE BUSINESS SECTOR IN PRACTICE? 
 
In general, businesses do not make their financial accounts and other information publicly 
available. Large companies under supervision have to publish consolidated financial 
highlights. 
 
1157
 Civil Code, Book 2, Article 15.  
1158
 Book 2 of the Civil Code, Article 121.1  
1159
 Ibid, Article 119. 
1160
 Central Bank Curaçao and Sint Maarten, Provisions for the Disclosure of Consolidated Financial 
Highlights of 
Domestic Banking Institutions, January 2010. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
201 
CURAÇAO 
 

The board of directors has the obligation to issue financial statements within eight months after end 
1164
of the fiscal year. As mentioned before, the financial statements should consist of at least a 
balance sheet, a profit and loss statement and explanatory notes. All directors (supervisory and 
management) have to sign the financial statements and these have to be approved in a 
shareholders meeting. Each shareholder has the right to request a closer look at the documents 
within two years after completion and approval of the financial statements.  
The financial statements have to comply with generally acceptable standards and have to give such 
insight that a sound opinion can be formed on the capital and the results, as well as on the solvency 
and the liquidity of the company. The Civil Code does not prescribe specific accounting principles. 
Companies are required to retain the financial statements and the supporting documentation for at 
least 10 years for review by stakeholders such as the shareholders and the tax authorities. 
The law establishes specific governance rules for companies under supervision. As noted in 
Chapter VII.14, Curaçao has a number of supervisors who monitor companies’ compliance with 
corporate governance laws. The Central Bank of Curaçao and Sint Maarten (CBCS) supervises the 
financial market sector. The Gaming Control Board supervises the casino sector and, as noted in 
Chapter VII.11, the Bureau Telecommunication and Post supervises the broadcast media. In 
general, these and other supervisory authorities have powers of enforcement (that is penalties, 
administrative fines and withdrawal of licences) for non-compliance. The legislative framework of the 
supervisors covers many relevant governance aspects, both related to the licensing procedures as 
well on-going business. This is especially true for the CBCS, which strengthened some years ago its 
1165
legal framework for supervision on compliance with integrity regulations. Financial integrity 
supervision focuses on the way in which an institution and affiliated (legal) persons adhere to 
standards set by the CBCS. Moreover, the supervision focuses also on the (corrective) measures for 
1166
risk containment taken by the institution to promote and maintain its integrity. 
Besides national regulators and supervisors, several international organisations monitor the 
activities of the private sector in Curaçao, as part of the Kingdom. As noted in Chapter VII.14 
Supervisory Institutions Private Sector, Curaçao is a member of, among other bodies, the Financial 
Action Task Force (FATF), the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force (CFATF), the Egmont Group 
of Financial Intelligent Units, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, and the Group 
of International Finance Centre Supervisors. 
As mentioned before, Curaçao does not have a competition authority in place to enforce fair 
competition.  
 
Accountability (practice) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THERE EFFECTIVE CORPORATE GOVERNANCE IN COMPANIES IN PRACTICE? 
 
Whether or not internal and external measures are effective in ensuring good governance is 
difficult to determine due to a lack of public information. The effectiveness of corporate 
governance varies in the sector. 
As the boards of supervisory directors (Raad van Commissarissen) of companies do not provide 
information which is available for the public, the amount of specific information related to the 
 
1164
 Civil Code, Book 2, Article 15. 
1165
 See CBCS Policy rule for sound business operations in the event of incidents and integrity – sensitive 
positions, January 2011 and CBCS Policy rule on integrity testing, Regulation on the number of (co)policy 
positions permitted per person (Beleidslijn voor Betrouwbaarheidstoetsing van locale PEP’s), on 
www.centralBank.cw [accessed 23 February 2013]. 
1166
 See ‘integrity financial sector’ via www.centralbank.an [accessed 23 February 2013]. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
203 
CURAÇAO 
 

1171 1172
objectivity. Also, lawyers associated to the Curaçao Bar Association are bound to a code of 
conduct, which espouses values such as independence, objectivity and confidentiality. 
In the case of chartered accountants employed in the business sector of Curaçao, complaints may 
be filed with the Accountantskamer, the Dutch disciplinary institution which deals with complaints 
against registered individuals (not organisations). For accountants with similar qualifications, such 
1173
as certified public accountants, similar disciplinary action is possible. In the case of lawyers, 
1174
complaints may be filed with the Council of Supervision (Raad van Toezicht voor de advocatuur). 
Tax consultants in Curaçao do not have a disciplinary institution and therefore complaints have to be 
brought before the Court of First Instance. 
Having a code of conduct and an effective integrity policy is not a selection criterion in tender 
procedures in Curaçao. Financial institutions generally have professional compliance officers, whose 
main role is to check if the institution follows the laws. There are also non-financial institutions with a 
compliance officer and/or an appointed confidant (vertrouwenspersoon) to report integrity issues to. 
The Association of Compliance Officers of Curaçao (ACCUR) has 130 members.  
The legal framework contains adequate provisions regarding corrupt practices within and between 
companies. Private sector bribery (both active and passive) is a punishable offence under the Penal 
1175
Code and can result in a prison sentence of up to three years and a fine of ANG 25,000 (US$ 
13,000).  
The person or entity in charge of the incorporation of a company is mainly responsible for these 
legal corporate obligations. A director is mainly liable for the damage occurred due to his failure to 
comply with obligations towards the company. In general, the director will not be held liable if he/she 
can prove that he/she did everything in his/her power to comply with his/her obligations on behalf of 
the company. He/she also has to prove that he has taken appropriate actions in order to avoid liable 
1176
situations, and can be held liable up to a year after failure to comply with his/her obligations. 
 
Integrity (practice) 
 
Score: 25 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT IS THE INTEGRITY OF THOSE WORKING IN THE BUSINESS SECTOR ENSURED IN PRACTICE? 
 
The consistency and effectiveness of integrity efforts cannot be determined, but in general 
there is a reactive approach regarding integrity issues. 
In general, businesses have no comprehensive approach to ensuring the integrity of board members 
and staff. According to those interviewed, the majority of companies do not have a formal pre-
employment screening procedure. Even where they exist, codes of conducts are not always applied. 
Regarding those companies with an integrity policy, it is not publicly known if they apply that policy 
in an effective way. This also accounts for integrity trainings; for example, accountants and lawyers 
 
1171
 See ‘professional rules auditors’ (Beroepsregels voor accountants) www.nba.nl [accessed 7 February 
2013]. 
1172
 Curacao Bar Association (Orde van Advocaten), http://ordevanadvocaten.an [accessed 4 June 2013]. 
1173
 www.accountantskamer.nl [accessed 12 February 2013]. Also refer to Press notice Dutch Caribbean 
Accountants Association of 28 May 2012 (Persbericht Nederlands Antilliaanse Vereniging van 
Accountants), see also: Persbericht van de Nedelands Antilliaanse Vereniging voor accountants 
http://accountantCuraçao.files.wordpress.com [accessed 12 February 2013].  
1174
 Advocatenlandsverordening (1959). De Raad van Toezicht fungeert als tuchtrechter voor advocaten. 
Als leidraad voor het toetsen van het handelen van advocaten gelden de Gedragsregels voor Advocaten, 
via www.smartbox.an [accessed 3 June2013] 
1175
 Penal code, Book 2, Article 312-313. 
1176
 Doing business in Curaçao 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
205 
CURAÇAO 
 

economic topics of the country. With the changes in the political landscape in 2010 Kolaborativo 
experiences a lack of cooperation of the government. 
 
Support for engagement with civil society  
Score: 75 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DOES THE BUSINESS SECTOR ENGAGE WITH/PROVIDE SUPPORT TO CIVIL SOCIETY ON ITS 
TASK OF COMBATING CORRUPTION? 
 
The business sector increasingly does engage with or provide support to civil society to 
raise awareness on good governance and educate the business sector on corporate 
governance. 
The experts interviewed recalled several examples of sponsoring civil society’s anti-corruption 
activities. Different private initiatives have contributed to the understanding of the corruption 
problem. In 2005 a local bank financed the Academic Chair of Good Governance for almost five 
years. This Chair was established at the University of the Netherlands Antilles to study and promote 
1181
good governance practices. In mid-2008, in collaboration with the Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry of Curaçao, the education of corporate supervisory directors was started by the Academic 
Chair. Unfortunately, since the term of the first-appointed professor ended in 2010, the position has 
been vacant.  
1182
Furthermore, since 2005 a private partnership has organised a ‘Day of Directorate’ (Dag van 
Commissariaat) on several occasions. In this yearly event, special attention is paid to corporate 
1183
governance for executives of (state-owned) companies. Today several other private 
organisations offer ‘governance education’ programmes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1181
 www.governanceCuraçao.com [accessed 6 May 2013]. 
1182
 VanEps Kunneman VanDoorne, the Galan Group and the University of the Netherlands Antilles for 
their initiative to organise this conference with the central theme ‘The Governance of Government-owned 
Enterprises’. 
1183
 See also: Magazine Coaching, 31 May 2013 www.coaching-magazine.net [accessed 31 May 2013]. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
207 
CURAÇAO 
 

responsible for the supervision of the financial sector’s compliance with regulations on the 
1193
identification of clients and the reporting of unusual transactions. 
Established in 1999, the Gaming Control Board (GCB) is responsible for tasks with regard to gaming 
control as assigned on the basis of public law. These include the licensing of casinos, the collection 
of taxes levied on the gaming sector and its supervision, including supervision of compliance with 
the abovementioned regulations on identification of clients and the reporting of unusual 
1194
transactions. The legal basis for GCB’s acts is the foundation’s charter combined with a decree 
1195
appointing GCB as the sector’s supervisor. GCB’s internal governance structure is not yet in line 
with the two-tier system incorporated in the corporate governance code. It has one board, 
responsible for the governing of the foundation. GCB’s two directors are responsible for the 
enactment of the board’s decisions and the day-to-day business on the instructions of the board. 
1196
GCB does not have a supervisory board.  
MOT, Curaçao’s Financial Intelligence Unit, was established under the former Netherlands Antilles 
in 1997. It is Curaçao’s administrative unit responsible for collecting, registering, processing and 
analysing unusual transaction reports regarding money laundering and terrorist financing. MOT’s 
1197
legal basis is the country ordinance Reporting unusual transactions. As of May 2010, and most 
relevant for this assessment which focuses on supervisory activities, MOT also acts as the 
supervisory body to monitor compliance of legal advisors, jewellers, real estate agents and car 
1198
dealers with the regulations on identification of clients and the reporting of unusual transactions.  
Curaçao or its supervisors are members of several international organisations. As part of the 
Kingdom, Curaçao is a member of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). Curaçao or its 
supervisors are also members of, among other bodies,  the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force 
(CFATF), the Egmont Group of Financial Intelligent Units and the International Association of 
Insurance Supervisors, as well as the Group of International Finance Centre Supervisors. The latter 
has close working relations with the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. Curaçao is 
committed to the implementation of the FATF-recommendations.  
Some institutions are not assessed in this chapter. Although GCB was to be the designated 
1199
supervisor for other gaming activities as well, at the moment lotteries and other games of chance 
do not fall under its supervision. Lottery organisers are to be licensed by the government, and the 
lottery sector also has a foundation to draw the prizes of lotteries, the Foundation Number Games 
Curaçao (Fundashon Wega di Number Kòrsou), the board of which also includes two members on 
the recommendation of the sector itself, in practice representatives of two gaming companies. This 
board does not have supervisory powers, and the lottery sector lacks an independent body with 
adequate supervisory and sanctioning powers to ensure a level playing field. Registration and 
 
1193
 Country ordinance Identification when rendering services (Landsverordening Identificatie bij financiële 
dienstverlening), consolidated text, Country Gazette 2010, No.40; Country ordinance Reporting unusual 
transactions (Landsverordening Melding ongebruikelijke transacties), consolidated text, Country Gazette 
2010, No.41. 
1194
 Country ordinance Casino sector Curaçao (Landsverordening Casinowezen Curaçao), Official 
Curaçao Gazette 1999, No.97 as last amended on 29 March 2010, Country Gazette 2010, No.27 (below: 
Country ordinance Casino sector). 
1195
 Charter Gaming Control Board (Statuten Gaming Control Board) of 19 April 1999 (below: Charter 
GCB); Island decree Appointing body Casino sector (Eilandsbesluit Aanwijzing instantie casinowezen), 
Official Curaçao Gazette 2009, No.60.  
1196
 Charter GCB, Articles 4, 6, 7 and 9. 
1197
 Country ordinance Reporting unusual transactions (Landsverordening Melding ongebruikelijke 
transacties), Country Gazette, 2010, No.41, Chapter II. 
1198 de
 Country decree of 12 April 2010, No. 10/1171(Landsbesluit van de 12 april 2010, no. 10/1171, 
ste
regelende de inwerkingtreding van de Landsverordening van de 26 oktober 2009 (P.B. 2009, no. 65) tot 
wijziging van de Landsverordening melding ongebruikelijke transacties), Country Gazette 2010, No.21 
and the comparable decree of the same date, No. 10/1172, on identification of clients, Country Gazette 
2010, No.22 . 
1199
 Cf. Project team GCB, Establishment memorandum Gaming Control Board (Oprichtingsnota Gaming 
Control Board), 28 April 1999, p.6. Transparency International has not been able to determine the formal 
status of this document. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
209 
CURAÇAO 
 

voice some concerns that, within the framework of anti-money-laundering and combating of the 
financing of terrorism (AML/CFT), there are ‘potential challenges with resources available for 
AML/CFT supervision and regulation of the financial institutions’, and that it seems that ‘staff are 
1206
pressured to effectively undertake AML/CFT oversight’.  
GCB also manages and controls its own budget, but, as far as could be established, is required to 
file its budget proposal for approval with the minister of finance. The minister of finance accounts for 
1207
transfers to GCB in Curaçao’s annual budget. GCB derives its funds from fees charged to the 
1208
supervised sector minus the funds transmitted to the government. By country ordinance, it is 
stipulated that GCB’s costs compensation is 37.5 per cent of GCB´s income generated from the 
1209
casino sector. At the moment, this is deemed to be a comfortable position, even though there are 
doubts as to whether – positive exceptions notwithstanding – the sector actually pays all fees legally 
1210
due.  
GCB is competent to recruit its own staff, although appointing its directors requires government’s 
prior consent. This includes the possibility to conclude employment contracts based on civil law and 
1211 1212
on GCB’s own terms and conditions. The full workforce comprises approximately 48 people. 
In practice, because at its establishment GCB was forced to take over all personnel of the 
government’s supervisory department, the educational background and work experience of its 
existing workforce, according to one expert interviewed, is said to be not fully up to par. Because it is 
not easy to attract new staff with adequate schooling and experience, in-house training is important.  
MOT is funded through the regular Curaçao budget, according to its approved budget to be 
1213
determined by the minister of finance in accordance with the minister of justice. In practice, up to 
now the budget is reported to have been sufficient to perform MOT’s core tasks, and substantiated 
1214
requests to increase the budget have always been honoured in the past. 
1215
The government also sets MOT’s staffing level and appoints its head and the rest of its staff. 
MOT’s staff of around 14 people is considered to have an adequate background and expertise, and 
staff members are trained on a regular basis. However, CFATF did recommend that MOT should be 
given more resources to, inter alia, fulfil its supervisory role, and also noted that its capacity to 
analyse and supervise is reported to be reduced because of the high number of turnover and 
1216
vacancies. MOT has sent a letter to the minister of finance requesting additional human 
1217
resources, but has yet to receive a reply.  
 
 
 
1206
 CFATF, June 2012: 252 and 156, also 157, 181 and 224; CFATF, October 2012: 10 and the 
Appendix, Recommendation 30. 
1207
 See, for example, Curaçao Budget 2013 (Begroting van Curaçao 2013), Country Gazette 2013, 
No.10, Statement of income transfers (Staat van inkomensoverdrachten). 
1208
 Charter GCB, Article 3.  
1209
 Country ordinance Casino sector, Article 20c.  
1210
 Also refer to ARC, August 2011: 51; ARC, Report of objections and remarks on the annual account 
2010 of the General Service of the island territory Curaçao (Rapport van bedenkingen en opmerkingen bij 
de jaarrekening 2010 van de algemene dienst van het Eilandgebied Curaçao)(Curaçao: ARC, October 
2012b), p.35. 
1211
 Charter GCB, Article 9.  
1212
 CFATF, June 2012: 222. 
1213
 Country ordinance Reporting unusual transactions, Article 9. Also refer to Country ordinance 
Government accounts 2010 (Landsverordening Comptabiliteit 2010), Official Curaçao Gazette 2010, 
No.87, Appendix b, Article 39. 
1214
 CFATF, June 2012: 82, 86. 
1215
 Country ordinance Reporting unusual transactions, Article 8. 
1216
 Curaçao Budget 2013, annex Statement of salaried personnel (Staat van te bezoldigen personeel). 
CFATF, June 2012: 202, also 92 and 252; CFATF, October 2012: 10 and the Appendix on 
Recommendation 30. 
1217
 Also refer to CFATF, October 2012: 10 and 37. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
211 
CURAÇAO 
 

GCB’s operational independence is not anchored as explicitly in the law. GCB derives its 
independent position from a government mandate, but to revoke it Parliament’s consent is not 
required. Also, there appears to be no disposition in the legislation or in GCB’s charter to prevent 
1226
government exercising its powers directly to decide on the issuing of licences. However, within 
the AML/CFT-framework, GCB does have the sole authority to sanction non-compliance, in ways 
similar to CBCS and MOT. GCB’s funding construction does limit the risk of political interference but 
increases dependency on, and the risk of interference from, the sector. (Also refer to Resources 
above.) 
Nevertheless, there are some provisions that strengthen GCB’s independence. For one, because 
government (or a minister) – which is to appoint and dismiss the board and needs to approve 
1227
appointment and dismissal of directors – is to abide with the corporate governance rules 
introduced some years ago. (Also refer to Chapter VII.4 Public Sector.) In addition, GCB’s charter 
requires a majority of three of the five board members – providing they satisfy the function profiles – 
to be appointed on a binding proposal of the CBCS, the public prosecutor and the Chamber of 
1228
Commerce respectively. Also, board members are to be appointed for four years, or, if appointed 
1229
secretary, six years, and may serve no more than two periods. Those who have a direct or 
1230
indirect interest in the gaming industry may not be appointed to the board. 
An important loophole, however, is the provision that the board remains a legal board as long as at 
least two of its members are in office, combined with government’s explicit authority to dismiss 
1231
board members. And contrary to CBCS’s charter, GCB’s charter does not explicitly rule out family 
ties between those under supervision, board members and appointing ministers, and there are no 
specific regulations on legal protection or immunity of GCB board and staff members. More 
generally, although a draft revision has been submitted, GCB’s current charter is not yet adapted to 
1232
comply with the corporate governance code. 
MOT is responsible to the minister of finance, who appoints, suspends and dismisses its head and 
staff in accordance with the minister of justice. As of 2010, MOT’s head is to be appointed for five 
1233
years at most, but there are no restrictions on his or her reappointment. On at least two counts, 
as CFATF also recently noted, the law leaves room for undue influence. Although MOT’s head is to 
be entrusted with its actual management, the minister of finance is the formal manager of MOT’s 
register, and there is no disposition indicating that he or she cannot decide to exercise his/her 
1234
powers and directly manage the database. Also, the composition and mandate of the required 
1235
‘Guidance Committee’ is a risk. The committee consists mainly of representatives of the private 
sector, and is also to include representatives of the ministers responsible, other supervisory 
institutions and the public prosecutor. It is to guide MOT in its mode of operation and advise the 
ministers on the manner in which MOT performs its tasks. In theory, this could ‘interfere with the 
mode of operation of MOT’, and ‘could also potentially lead to undue influence from [its] 
 
1226
 See Country ordinance Casino sector, for example Articles 5, 11 and 13; Charter GCB, Article 2.2a. 
Cf. Project team GCB, April 1999: 9; 12.  
1227
 Charter GCB, Articles 4, 8 and 9. 
1228
 Ibid., Article 4.  
1229
 Ibid. 
1230
 Ibid.  
1231
 Charter GCB, Articles 8 and 9. Cf. Civil Code, Book 2, Article 55. 
1232
 Also refer to STBNO, Advice wrt Charter Gaming Control Board (GCB) as adapted to comply with the 
Code (Advies mbt Statuten Gaming Control Board (GCB) zoals aangepast om te voldoen aan de Code), 
14 November 2012. The advisor repeats this in his Advice wrt Advice concerning intention appointment 
mw. C.H. Hato-Willems as board member Foundation Gaming Control Board (Advies inzake voornemen 
benoeming mw. C.H. Hato-Willems als Bestuurslid Stichting Gaming Control Board [art. 9. AB 2009 
no.92]), 15 May 2013. 
1233
 Country ordinance Reporting unusual transactions, Article 8. 
1234
 Ibid., Article 4; CFATF, June 2012: 81-82 and 91. 
1235
 Country ordinance Reporting unusual transactions, Articles 16 to 18. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
213 
CURAÇAO 
 

1243
approached the supervisory board of CBCS – as well as by the president himself. In October 
2012, and after a request of the Curaçao Parliament, the Court of Audit, ARC, published its report 
1244
on some of the issues raised. Some of the allegations appear to have been sufficiently 
countered, but the report has not been able to answer all of Parliament’s questions. This is in part 
because, according to ARC, it was not given access to all relevant documents, and ‘for the time 
1245
being’ decided not to use its authority to call the police for assistance. Also, CBCS in turn 
1246
indicates it did not have a chance to give its opinion on the draft. (Also refer to Integrity, below.) 
Meanwhile, because Curaçao and Sint Maarten could not agree on the seventh member of the 
Bank’s supervisory board, it took more than a year to complete it, and only after taking recourse to 
an ‘emergency procedure’ which requires the president of the Joint Court of Justice to (temporarily) 
1247
appoint someone if the governments fail to do so. At the time of writing, the supervisory board 
has only once met as a full board. When it did, the members appointed at the proposal of Sint 
Maarten were reportedly ‘bombarded with eggs’ by supporters of one of Curaçao’s parties in 
1248
government. Three of the members, all from Curaçao, do not recognise the appointment of the 
seventh member as lawful. They refuse to attend the meetings of the supervisory board and do not 
1249
acknowledge its decisions. Moreover, according to an expert interviewed, the current 
composition of the supervisory board is not sufficiently balanced, and contains too few members 
with relevant expertise in finance and economics, which hampers the effectiveness of its supervision 
of the acts of the board of executive directors.  
Whether and to what extent these strained relations imply CBCS’s operational independence as 
supervisor of the financial sector is in jeopardy is unknown. CFATF reports that government does 
1250
not give any operational direction and/or guidance to CBCS. Neither have there been 
documented cases of CBCS’s staff engaging in activities that could compromise their operational 
independence. The assessment did return one mention of possible undue influence of the financial 
sector several years ago, which was also mentioned by the public prosecutor in a recent Dutch court 
case. In that case, it was suggested in formal declarations to the public prosecutor that the Bank has 
not always been stringent in its supervision and, in that specific case, was even remarkably lenient 
1251 
when issuing a Bank permit. The Bank issued a press statement firmly refuting the 
1252
insinuations, whereas three of the seven members of the supervisory board did find reason for a 
1253
thorough financial forensic investigation. However, as yet such an investigation has not been 
conducted, and the issue and claims remain unsubstantiated. 
Over the last couple of years, GCB’s operational independence has been called into question to a 
point where, according to one observer interviewed, ‘at this moment the casino sector determines 
1254
what happens within its supervisor GCB’. Developments do raise some legitimate questions. 
Because one board member reached his pension, two members put forward at the recommendation 
 
1243
 See Launching inquiry w.r.t. developments Central Bank of Curaçao and Sint Maarten, (Instelling 
onderzoek m.b.t. ontwikkelingen rond de Centrale Bank van Curaçao en Sint Maarten), letter of the Prime 
Minster a.i., Mr. Ch. Cooper, to CBCS’ Supervisory Board, 31 May 2011. 
1244
 ARC, October 2012a. 
1245
 ARC, October 2012a: 4.  
1246
 Also refer to ARC, October 2012a, p.38. 
1247
 Bank Charter, Article 25. 
1248
 See, for example, ‘Vote supervisory board CBCS is 4/3’ (Stemverhouding RvC CBCS is 4/3), 24 April 
2012 via www.kkcuracao.com [accessed 24 February 2013].  
1249
 See, for example, ‘Camelia asks questions to researchers PwC’ (Camelia stelt vragen aan 
onderzoekers PwC), Amigoe, 29 May 2013. 
1250
 CFATF, June 2012: 224. 
1251
 On this case, see, for example, Judgment of 25 May 2012, District Court of Arnhem, LJN BW6504; 
‘Central Bank in defense against PP Arnhem’ (Centrale Bank in verdediging tegen OM Arnhem), 10 April 
2012 via www.rnw.nl [accessed 7 June 2013].  
1252
 Official press statement of the Bank, Press statement (Persbericht) 2012-004, 10 April 2012. 
1253
 See, for example, ‘Bank president Emsley Tromp reviewed’ (Bank President Emsley Tromp 
doorgelicht), De Volkskrant, 16 June 2012, via www.volkskrant.nl [accessed 2 June 2013].  
1254
 Also refer to KLPD, Crime analysis of Curaçao 2008 (Criminaliteitsbeeldanalyse Curaçao 2008) 
(Zoetermeer: Korps Landelijke Politiediensten, Dienst IPOL, 2009), p.139. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
215 
CURAÇAO 
 

Governance 
 
Transparency (law) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE PROVISIONS IN PLACE TO ENSURE THAT THE PUBLIC CAN OBTAIN RELEVANT 
INFORMATION ON ACTIVITIES AND DECISIONS OF THE SUPERVISORY INSTITUTIONS (PRIVATE SECTOR)? 
 
 
There are provisions in place to ensure that the public can obtain information on CBCS’s 
activities and decisions, although its supervisory activities are only partly covered. GCB and 
MOT are not required to make any information public.  
CBCS’s charter requires the Bank’s monthly condensed balance sheet as well as the supervisory 
board’s rules of procedure to be published in the official Country Gazettes. In addition, the Bank has 
1267
a role in the production and dissemination of statistics. The Bank is also required to send its 
annual budget, report and account to Parliament for perusal, although the charter does not specify 
1268 
any deadlines to do so. The Bank’s supervisory ordinances also require the Bank to ensure some 
transparency. Thus, for example, the Bank is required to publish a decision to grant and withdraw 
licences of credit institutions and insurance companies, and to do so as soon as possible. The Bank 
is also required to maintain a register of credit institutions licensed by the Bank, and make a copy of 
1269
the register available at the Bank’s office for inspection free of charge.  
On the negative side, requirements to make information public are not identical across financial 
sectors. Most notably, the Bank is required to make public its yearly report to the ministers of 
finances on its activities and findings in the insurance sector. However, no such obligation exists in, 
1270
for example, the banking sector.  
As far as could be established, GCB is currently under no legal obligation to make any of its 
information publicly available. However, in its (non-binding) establishment memorandum it is 
recommended GCB report to Parliament (at that time, the Eilandsraad) on its activities within three 
months after the year ending. This report should include a description of relevant sector 
developments and a summary of the important decisions of the board, including licences issued and 
1271
withdrawn. It should also, the memorandum suggests, include GCB’s annual accounts.  
MOT is also not required to make any information publicly available, with one important exception. 
MOT is required to inform anyone at his or her request whether and if so what personal data 
regarding this person are incorporated in the register, unless the proper execution of the task of the 
Reporting Office or weighty interests of third parties necessitate otherwise. CFATF has 
recommended revising the law ‘to better protect the access to the database from individuals being 
the object of unusual transaction reports’. Transparency International was informed that since 
MOT’s inception this article has never been used, and that the article will be deleted in the upcoming 
1272
revision of the relevant ordinance.  
 
1267
 Bank Charter, Article 17, 25 en 39. 
1268
 Ibid., Articles 24, 37 and 38. 
1269
 Cf. Country ordinance Supervision of the bank and credit institutions 1994, Country Gazette 1994. No. 
4, Articles 7, 9 and 11; Country ordinance Supervision insurance industry, Articles 15 and 56. 
1270
 Country ordinance Supervision insurance industry, Article 33.2 reads: ‘the report shall be made public 
through the good offices of the Bank’.  
1271
 Project team GCB, April 1999: 36-37. Also: Charter GCB, Article 11.  
1272
 Country ordinance Reporting unusual transactions, Article 22; CFTAF, June 2012: 91; Also CFATF, 
October 2012: 32.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
217 
CURAÇAO 
 

1278
in the area of AML/CFT in its reply to CFATF. However, so far more substantive information on 
its supervisory and sanction activities and policies – taking due account of confidentiality 
1279
requirements – is only made public in a piecemeal fashion. 
As for GCB, it is, as one expert indicated, ‘most certainly not’ the case that the general public has 
easy access to its information. GCB does not have a website, and the internet in general also does 
not provide access to a lot of information on GCB’s activities. In addition, it has been suggested that 
data which were made public in the past, are not made public anymore. Moreover, there is no record 
of GCB’s annual accounts sent to Parliament. There is no public register of casinos licensed. 
MOT does have a website, and also provides information about its activities through trainings and 
public interviews. MOT’s website also provides access to a lot of content and, for example, contains 
some general information about its organisation, annual reports, relevant legislation and regulatory 
framework, as well as warning notices. It also provides information on how to report, including direct 
access to its digital portal. In addition, MOT provides transparency in its activities in Curaçao’s 
1280
budget, which is made public in the course of the regular Curaçao budget procedures. 
However, MOT’s most recent annual report made public is that of 2009. More recent ones are 
reported to be in the final stages of completion but not yet published. In addition, although they do 
provide a substantial amount of information and contain a ‘very complete set of statistics and 
graphs’, according to CFATF, MOT’s annual reports could include more information on money-
1281
laundering trends and typologies. Also, as mentioned in the above, MOT only gained supervisory 
powers from 2010, and now is the authorised body to monitor compliance of legal advisors, 
jewellers, real estate agents and car dealers with the regulations of the AML/CFT-framework. This 
also implies that, so far, MOT’s reports did not provide a lot of information on its supervisory 
activities. Transparency International was informed that MOT will provide more information on these 
in its annual report over 2011. 
 
Accountability (law) 
Score: 50 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE PROVISIONS IN PLACE TO ENSURE THAT THE SUPERVISORY INSTITUTIONS 
(PRIVATE SECTOR) HAVE TO REPORT AND BE ANSWERABLE FOR THEIR ACTIONS? 
 
 
There are important legal provisions to ensure that CBCS and MOT are answerable for their 
actions, but the legal framework to hold them accountable for the use of the supervisory 
powers delegated to them is weak. The law has hardly any specific provisions that require 
GCB to report on and account for its activities. 
CBCS is accountable to the equity holders of the Bank, that is, Curaçao and Sint Maarten, 
represented by the ministers of finance. In order to grant discharge to the board of executive 
directors, CBCS’s externally-audited annual account is to be approved by the supervisory board, 
and in order to grant discharge to the supervisory board, the account is to be adopted at the annual 
1282
meeting of the Bank’s equity holders. This meeting is to be held within six months after the 
1283 
reporting year. Once adopted, only the financial statement must be sent to the ministers of 
 
1278
See for example CFATF, October 2012, Matrix, 33-36. 
1279
 Cf. ARC, October 2012a: 29.  
1280
 See, for example, Curaçao Budget 2013 and the explanatory memorandum to the budget, p.295 and 
further. 
1281
 CFATF, June 2012: 83-84, 91; CFATF, October 2012: 32. 
1282
 Bank Charter, Article 38. 
1283
 Ibid., Article 32. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
219 
CURAÇAO 
 

MOT is to submit an annual report on its activities and its plan for the following year to the minister 
of finance. There are no specific requirements as to the content of this report, but it is understood it 
is to cover MOT’s supervisory activities as well. MOT is required to also bring its annual report to the 
1298
notice of the minister of justice, but there is no such obligation to Parliament. As an 
administrative unit, MOT’s financial management is subject to the control of SOAB and ARC as part 
of the regular Curaçao accountability process, and accounted for in Curaçao’s annual accounts to 
1299
Parliament.  
MOT does not have a specific complaints procedure, but because MOT is an administrative unit, 
1300
general civil servants regulations do apply. In administrative proceedings, those under MOT’s 
supervision can act against its decisions, such as those related to administrative sanctions. (Refer to 
VII.4 Public Sector for a more detailed discussion.) 
 
Accountability (practice) 
Score: 25 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DO THE SUPERVISORY INSTITUTIONS (PRIVATE SECTOR) REPORT AND BE ANSWERABLE FOR 
THEIR ACTIONS IN PRACTICE? 
 
 
The lack of effective communication between the different relevant equity holders, directors 
and boards implies accountability of CBCS is not ensured in practice. It is unknown whether 
or not this also applies to GCB. On the positive side, standard annual (financial) reporting 
appears adequately provided for, albeit sometimes with delays. MOT’s accountability is 
adequately ensured in practice.  
CBCS’s budgets for 2011 and 2012 were approved by the Bank’s supervisory board, albeit both with 
delays of many months into the budgetary years concerned. The budget for 2013 was approved in 
February 2013. As required, the budgets have been sent to the equity holders, the minister of 
finance and Parliament for perusal. Its annual account over (part of 2010 and) 2011 was audited by 
an external accountant and has been approved by the supervisory board in the course of 2012. At 
the time of our assessment, both the accounts and the accounting principles they were based on 
had yet to be adopted by the equity holders. CBCS’s annual report, which does not require approval 
and adoption of the supervisory board and equity holders, was sent to Parliament and is, as 
reported above, published on its website.  
Also, the Bank does report annually to the ministers of finance as required on the insurance sector, 
in ways similar to the reporting in its public annual report. However, as far as could be established, 
the Bank does not account for its supervisory policy or its own supervisory activities in much more 
detail than the information provided in its annual reports. (Also see under Transparency.) In part, as 
several experts noted, this is to be understood in light of the confidentiality restrictions necessary for 
the Bank to perform its duties, which makes balancing the essential operational independence of the 
Bank and a sufficient degree of accountability challenging. So far, as was also underscored in the 
aforementioned ARC report, CBCS does not proactively account for the use of its supervisory 
1301
powers and the effectiveness of its supervision. Moreover and more generally, ARC also 
reported that, because of a lack of information, it was not able to adequately judge the functioning of 
1302
the institution.  
 
1298
 Country ordinance Reporting unusual transactions, Article 3. 
1299
 Cf. country ordinance Government accounts. 
1300
 Country ordinance regulating the legal and material rights and obligations of civil servants, Article 80 
and Sections 15 and 16. 
1301
 ARC, October 2012a: 3-6. 
1302
 ARC, October 2012a: 5. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
221 
CURAÇAO 
 

Integrity mechanisms (law) 
Score: 75 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THERE MECHANISMS IN PLACE TO ENSURE THE INTEGRITY OF THE SUPERVISORY 
INSTITUTIONS (PRIVATE SECTOR)? 
 
 
CBCS, GCB and MOT all have several provisions in place (although some more than others) 
which aim to ensure the integrity of the institutions, and strict confidentiality rules apply.  
The integrity rules for civil servants do not apply to board members and personnel of CBCS. 
However, the Bank has several regulations of its own, including provisions related to gifts and 
incompatibilities. Thus, for example, board members and employees are required not to accept or 
request gifts which he/she understands are given in return for doing or not doing something in 
1310
his/her official function, and additional regulations further detail how employees are expected to 
1311
deal with gifts. Also, employees are not allowed to engage in additional functions or act as, inter 
1312
alia, advisor of relations of the Bank without prior approval of the Bank and an employee is not to 
1313
engage in other salaried work or his own business without prior written approval of the board. 
Deputy directors and supervisory personnel, inter alia, are required to sign an agreement containing 
additional requirements related to incompatibilities, including an annual notification requirement of 
1314
additional functions and activities. There are no additional regulations related to additional 
functions and activities for board members, other than the one referred to in the section on 
Independence.  
Also, in those cases where the Bank may enforce administrative orders with periodic penalty 
payments or a penalty, there are rules to ensure that those involved with investigating or 
1315
establishing a violation are not the same as those involved in sanctioning such violation. 
1316
Moreover, CBCS board and personnel have a general duty of confidentiality, and have to abide 
by the specific – and varying – confidentiality rules incorporated in the different supervisory 
1317
regulations. The legislation on the reporting of unusual transactions also contains a 
confidentiality clause, violation of which can be prosecuted as an offence. However, the Bank is 
authorised to inform the Reporting Office of MOT of facts which come to light in the performance of 
its duties that could possibly indicate money laundering or the financing of terrorism (but not other 
1318
supervisors as mentioned in that legislation).  
The integrity rules for civil servants also do not apply to board and personnel of GCB, and GCB 
does not have a comprehensive code of conduct. Instead, its rules on integrity are reported to be 
scattered across GCB’s employment contracts, the establishment document and legal provisions, 
although not all of this could be assessed independently. Thus, for example, confidentiality is 
 
1310
 Regulations terms of employment board Bank of the Netherlands Antilles (Reglement 
arbeidsvoorwaarden directie Bank van de Nederlandse Antillen), February 1989; Regulations Terms of 
Employment Personnel Bank of the Netherlands Antilles (Reglement arbeidsvoorwaarden personeel Bank 
Nederlandse Antillen), February 1989. Employees are those employed at the Bank for at least 20 hours 
per week. 
1311
 Regulation acceptance of gifts BNA (Regeling aannemen van geschenken BNA), February 2004. Also 
see Professional regulations for supervisory personnel, September 1995. 
1312
 Regulations terms of employment personnel Bank Netherlands Antilles. Also see Professional 
regulations for supervisory personnel, September 1995. 
1313
 Regulations terms of employment personnel Bank Netherlands Antilles.  
1314
 Regulation Incompatibilities Bank of the Netherlands Antilles.  
1315
  See for example country ordinance Reporting unusual transactions, Article 22f. 
1316
 Bank Charter, Article 31 (Board members) and Regulations Terms of employment personnel Bank 
Netherlands Antilles. 
1317
 Compare, for example, country ordinance Supervision insurance industry, Article 78; country 
ordinance Supervision of the bank and credit institutions 1994, Part VIII; and country ordinance Reporting 
unusual transactions, Chapter V. 
1318
 Country ordinance Reporting unusual transactions, Article 20. Cf. CFATF, June 2012: 133-135.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
223 
CURAÇAO 
 

However, whether or not the Bank’s internal integrity rules, as mentioned in the previous section and 
in the section on Independence, are in practice observed could not be confirmed. According to ARC, 
it remains ‘uncertain’ whether the integrity rules are observed in practice, and, if not, whether they 
1326
are sanctioned.  
Alleged integrity issues have, however, been widely debated. As referred to above, the position of 
the Bank’s president has been subject of debate. The according to some members go-it-alone 
functioning of the chairperson of CBCS’s supervisory board has also been contested in a resolution 
1327
of the supervisory board. Moreover, in some cases, charges have been pressed against the 
president of the Bank, and in one case, such pressing charges were also announced against the 
supervisory board. However, so far, in at least one case, the Public Prosecutor’s Office announced it 
1328
did not see reason for further investigation, no cases have been brought to court and, as 
mentioned above, some of the allegations against the president appear to have been sufficiently 
1329
countered. Other allegations remain unresolved and are fuelled by the on-going media coverage. 
Pending the outcome of the on-going operational audit, there is insufficient information on which to 
adequately base our assessment.  
All prospective employees of GCB are screened by the VDC, although for board members this 
1330
responsibility lies with government. GCB is also reported to periodically issue internal memos 
with procedures on the required behaviour of its personnel. Integrity training has not been 
organised, but is reported to be considered, and it was suggested in our assessment that in those 
1331
cases of violation of ethical standards, personnel was either suspended or fired. However, 
because of the loopholes and weaknesses identified in the section on Independence and 
Transparency, there is insufficient evidence to suggest that the integrity of the institution is ensured 
in practice. 
MOT’s prospective employees are also reported to be screened by the VDC, and those employed 
are also screened on a regular basis. Whenever individuals from other institutions perform activities 
1332
for MOT, they are required to sign a secrecy statement. MOT’s staff members are also regularly 
trained on integrity issues, and no breaches of ethical standards by MOT’s staff were reported. 
 
Role 
 
Effective integrity supervison (law and practice) 
Score: - 
 
TO WHAT EXTENT DO THE SUPERVISORY INSTITUTIONS (PRIVATE SECTOR) PROVIDE EFFECTIVE INTEGRITY 
SUPERVISION? 
 
 
Curaçao’s legal framework allows for effective integrity supervision, although some issues 
need to be addressed to fully comply with international standards. CBCS, GCB and to a 
lesser extent MOT perform integrity audits in practice, but due to a lack of publicly-available 
information on process, outcome and effects, their effectiveness cannot be determined. 
 
1326
 ARC, October 2012a: 14. 
1327
 ‘Resolution against chairperson RvC Central Bank’ (Resolutie tegen voorzitter RvC Centrale Bank), 
21 August 2012 via www.kkcuracao.com. 
1328
 See, for example, Commissie onderzoek Curaçao, September 2011: 16.  
1329
 See ARC, October 2012a: 6-7. 
1330
 Also refer to SBTNO, November 2012: 2. CFATF, June 2012: 225. Cf. Project team, April 1999: 14.  
1331
 CFATF, June 2012: 226.  
1332
 Ibid.,: 225, 88.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
225 
CURAÇAO 
 

reliability and knowledge and skills regarding casinos. These requirements for initial licensing are 
1340
also applied for annual renewal of the casino and personal licences.  
CBCS and GCB also conduct regular on-site and continuous off-site investigations, and use the 
information received for their organisational and relational integrity audits. Thus, for example, CBCS 
reports that it uses exit interviews with external auditors, well as the periodically-filed management 
1341
reports which include regulatory issues and compliance. In addition, GCB has a technical team 
1342
which is responsible for physically monitoring operations of casinos on a daily basis. GCB is also 
1343
reported to audit routinely all casinos annually, although the memorandum of understanding 
suggested this is to be less frequent, suspicion of foul play or audits on a random selection basis 
1344
aside. Recently, GCB indicated it also intends to carry out audits of the financial statements of 
1345
casinos. MOT conducted ‘a pilot programme of test audits’, which was used as a learning 
exercise. Its own supervisory activities, until recently, mainly concerned assisting other supervisory 
1346
authorities in presentations for reporting entities. However, Transparency International was 
1347
informed that MOT has now started its regular audit investigations, which may result in sanctions.  
Whether or not the above implies CBCS and GCB provide effective audits, however, is unknown, 
and for MOT somewhat premature. The amount of specific, publicly-available information related to 
the process, outcome and effects of integrity supervision is limited. CBCS does provide some 
information in its annual reports, MOT (so far) less, and GCB none, and none of the available 
information on supervisory activities performed can be labelled ‘comprehensive’. And although those 
supervised generally speak of effective oversight, some conclusions drawn do not point in the same 
direction. ARC concludes that the design of the Bank’s supervision is adequate, but it adds that it 
has not been able to confirm whether the stated design in practice actually exists due to a lack of 
1348
available information. In addition, specifically related to AML-supervision, CFATF does rate the 
relevant supervisory powers as largely compliant with the CFATF-recommendations, but also finds 
that ‘the limited number of AML on-site inspections do not definitely demonstrate adequacy of 
supervisory powers’, and recommends that it covers more licensed institutions within its risk-based 
1349
approach and includes a file review. It re-iterates the point of the effectiveness of the Bank’s risk-
1350
based approach in a follow-up report. As for MOT, CFATF points to some effectiveness issues, 
and concludes that as of yet it has not put in place an effective supervisory regime to monitor 
1351
compliance with AML/CFT-regulations. (But see above on 2013).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1340
 CFATF, June 2012: 199. Also refer to Project team GCB, April 1999.  
1341
 Policy memorandum on the change of external auditors of a credit institution and Policy memorandum 
in the periodic filing of a management report, via www.centralbank.cw [accessed 7 June 2013]. 
1342
 CFATF, June 2012: 200. Also refer to Project team GCB, April 1999.  
1343
 CFATF, October 2012: 23. Also refer to CFATF, June 2012: 200.  
1344
 Memorandum of Understanding annexed to Country decree of 12 May 2011, No.11/0928, ‘Auditing 
and aim of MICS’. 
1345
 CFATF, October 2012: 8 and 23. 
1346
 For example, MOT, Annual Report 2009, p.43. 
1347
 Cf. CFATF, June 2012: 187; CFATF, October 2012: 10.  
1348
 ARC, October 2012a: 6. 
1349
CFATF, June 2012: 11, 181, and 203; also156-157 and 160. Also see CFATF, October 2012: 33-35 
and 10.  
1350
 CFATF, October 2012: 5 (point 6) in relation to 10 (recommendation 24).  
1351
 CFATF, June 2012: 92 and 187; also refer to for example 76-88, 147 and 259. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
227 
CURAÇAO 
 

turn to sanctions. Thus, regarding the Bank’s regular integrity supervision, including but beyond 
AML/CFT supervision, CFATF reports that ‘(w)henever insufficient compliance with the laws is 
1359
detected, [the Bank] has primarily used moral suasion to bring about corrective action’. Moral 
suasion may in certain cases be effective and it may also be efficient, given that the Bank reportedly 
has to go through a cumbersome process to actually collect sanctions in case of non-payment. 
1360
However, whether it in fact is effective, cannot be determined.  
GCB was established to focus more on preventive controls combined with tough sanctions in case 
1361
of overstepping the line. GCB’s directors are charged with the actual supervision, whereas GCB’s 
1362
board is responsible for sanctioning. However, CFATF reports that GCB has not yet imposed a 
1363
sanction on a casino for contravention of the MICS. Transparency International has not been 
able to obtain sufficient information to assess whether GCB has or has not invoked or refused 
renewal of any licences to date. If lack of sanctioning is due to compliance of the sector, this is to be 
applauded. However, given that the sector has not always been willing to adhere to the norms 
1364
incorporated in the law and against the background of the 2011 memorandum of understanding, 
a lack of sanctioning is a reason for concern. According to CFATF, focusing on AML/CFT 
compliance, ‘while the implementation of AML/CFT audits on casinos is a positive step in the 
supervision of casinos, compliance with the Examiners’ recommendation should focus on the issue 
1365
of the sanctions which will need to be addressed in a more definite way’.  
MOT, in its capacity as supervisor, as mentioned above, has only recently started its regular audit 
investigations and has not yet considered the imposition of sanctions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1359
 CFATF, June 2012: 175. 
1360
 Also refer to ARC, 2012a: 22. 
1361
 Cf. Project team GCB (April 1999): 6. 
1362
 Island Decree appointing body Casino sector and Island decree of 4 December 2002 to effectuate 
article 23, first clause of the Island ordinance Casino sector Curaçao (OCG 1999, No.97) (Eilandsbesluit, 
houdende algemene maatregelen van de 4de December 2002 ter uitvoering van artikel 23, eerste lid, van 
de Eilandsverordening Casinowezen Curaçao (A.B. 1999, no.97)), Official Curaçao Gazette, 2002, No.85.  
1363
 CFATF, June 2012: 187-188. 
1364
 See for example, Casinos ignore rules of the game (Casino’s negeren spelregels), Antilliaans 
Dagblad, 18 May 2011.  
1365
 CFATF, October 2012: 9. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
229 
CURAÇAO 
 

making processes. Because of this weakness, the inevitable and necessary nuances temporarily put 
aside, Curaçao’s parliamentary democracy has not yet sufficiently evolved into a system which 
adequately represents the electorate. Instead, sometimes, it resembles a system in which today’s 
winners – backed up by their extended families, business partners, party financers and voters – try 
to exploit legislative and executive power temporarily granted to further specific interests. As a 
result, the rights of the large minority are insufficiently safeguarded.  
 
Party discipline, however, cannot, be sustained at all times, and the Curaçao National Integrity 
System is also characterised by a political landscape with changing coalitions, in which today’s small 
majority governing the country may be tomorrow’s large minority in Parliament. In essence, the latter 
is considered to be a good thing, because it is one of the few existing mechanisms to ensure that 
the Executive is held to account. 
 
Nevertheless, the accountability of the Executive remains weak in practice. This, in turn, undermines 
the capacity of the public sector to operate effectively. For example, the Executive exerts strong 
influence on appointments in the public sector as well as on its output, including some examples of 
direct interference in administrative matters. Furthermore, the specific circumstances of the new 
constitutional relations, requiring two executive layers to be merged into one, have not resulted in an 
enhancement of the public sector’s performance to date.  
 
Because these institutions do not function well, in practice much of the work of the well-functioning 
oversight institutions, most prominently the judiciary, the supreme audit and supervisory institutions 
as well as the Ombudsman, is undermined. For example, many of the recommendations of the 
supreme audit and supervisory institutions and the Ombudsman lack follow-up and court decisions 
are not sufficiently enforced. Furthermore, the lack of adequate complaints mechanisms within the 
administration creates a high demand on the Ombudsman’s services and limits the ability of the 
Ombudsman to investigate more proactively. The slow pace of reform in Curaçao’s financial 
management framework, meanwhile, results in ineffective financial audits. Additionally, while the 
judiciary has the authority to penalise offenders in corruption-related cases, it is dependent on the 
Public Prosecutor’s Office to bring cases to court. The Public Prosecutor’s Office, in turn, is to a 
large extent dependent on prosecutions instigated by law enforcement agencies. The lack of 
sufficient financial and human resources within the police forces creates a high demand on the 
services of Public Prosecutor’s Office and limits its ability to prosecute. 
  
Civil society and business, on the other hand, are less dependent on the functioning of the public 
sector when performing their watchdog role. However, the impact of their activities is difficult to 
measure, and the stronghold of the party political mandate affecting many of the aforementioned 
institutions reduces their ability to influence policies through advocacy. 
 
 
National Integrity System pillars: key strengths and weaknesses 
The following section summarises the most important strengths and weaknesses of the Curaçao 
National Integrity System pillars, as identified in the preceding chapters. 
 
 
LEGISLATURE (Staten) 
 
Key strengths 
 There are generally strong legal provisions to ensure that Parliament has the capacity to 
effectively perform its functions, both in terms of resources and independence.  
 Parliament has numerous and sufficient powers to oversee the Executive. 
 
Key weaknesses 
 Party discipline is considered to considerably limit Parliament’s independence.  
 There are almost no formal provisions to provide for publication of parliamentary documents. 
 Important provisions such as those related to gifts, assets, additional functions and lobbying 
contacts are not in place.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
231 
CURAÇAO 
 

 Screening procedures for positions involving confidentiality in the public sector are not yet fully 
in place.  
 Mechanisms to monitor and enforce compliance with integrity provisions are not yet fully in 
place. 
 The letter and spirit of the corporate governance ordinance and the corporate governance code 
are not yet fully observed in practice. Transparency of public companies and public foundations 
is weak, and delays in reporting limit the ability to hold those entities effectively accountable. 
 The public sector does not adequately inform and educate citizens about their role in fighting 
corruption.  
 
 
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES (Public Prosecutor’s Office, KPC, Landsrecherche) 
 
Key strengths 
 The legal framework contains several provisions designed to ensure the independence of law 
enforcement bodies, including robust provisions to appoint, suspend and dismiss law 
enforcement officers. 
 The Public Prosecutor’s Office is responsible for its own personnel and budget. 
 
Key weaknesses 
 There are serious concerns about the information processes of both the police forces and the 
Public Prosecutor’s Office.  
 Despite an enabling legal framework, police forces are unable to operate with a high degree of 
independence in practice because they are under financial control of the government. 
 A few legal instruments are in place to ensure individual citizens’ access to information on 
management and working procedures, investigations and prosecutions but overall, transparency 
provisions are limited.  
 Investigation and prosecution of corruption cases is generally complicated and time-consuming. 
Insufficient financial and human resources (expertise) and institutional mistrust have a negative 
effect on the detection and investigation of corruption cases in Curaçao. 
 There are no regular and comprehensive statistics specifically on corruption cases. 
 
 
ELECTORAL MANAGEMENT BODY (HSB) 
 
Key strengths 
 The operational independence of the Supreme Electoral Council in practice is strong, and its 
integrity has not been questioned in spite of insufficient legal safeguards in this regard. 
 The electoral council has been active and successful in ensuring the integrity of the electoral 
process in general.  
 
Key weaknesses 
 The legislative framework on the financing of political parties does not contain any provisions to 
ensure sufficient capacity and effective governance of the electoral council.  
 The regulations on the financing of political parties are not effectively executed in practice. 
 
 
OMBUDSMAN (Ombudsman van Curaçao) 
 
Key strengths 
 The legislative framework includes many aspects to ensure the independence of the 
Ombudsman, and in practice the Ombudsman operates in a professional and non-partisan 
manner.  
 The Ombudsman recently adopted a code of ethics including many of the relevant provisions to 
ensure the integrity of the Ombudsman. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
233 
CURAÇAO 
 

 There is little publicly-available information on processes, outcomes and impact of supervisory 
activities and little use of available sanctioning instruments. 
  
 
POLITICAL PARTIES 
 
Key strengths 
 The legal framework provides an environment which is conducive to the establishment and 
operation of political parties.  
 Political parties have extensive freedom to shape their internal governance and several parties 
have regulations in place to cover aspects of internal democratic governance. 
 
Key weaknesses 
 Transparency is very weak. There are no provisions to ensure that political parties make their 
annual reports and accounts public. The source of funds of most party finances is not disclosed. 
Politicians are not required to make any information on their finances publicly available. 
 The regulation of party finances contains important loopholes and ambiguities which limit 
effective oversight. In practice, there is no financial oversight of political parties. 
 Little is known about the internal democratic governance of the political parties.  
 
 
MEDIA 
 
Key strengths 
 The legal framework provides an environment which is conducive to the development of a 
diverse media.  
 Comprehensive legal safeguards exist to prevent unwarranted external interference in the 
content supplied by the media.  
 
Key weaknesses 
 There is a potential risk of conflict of interest regarding the registration, licensing and 
supervision of the telecommunications providers.  
 Private ownership of media and dependence on financiers and revenue from advertising has 
severe consequences for the impartiality of news content.  
 A shortage of trained journalists and low salaries result in unsubstantiated press releases 
ending up in radio and television programmes and newspapers without being thoroughly 
checked. 
 Provisions to ensure the integrity of media employees are scarce. 
 While the media do inform the public on corruption and its impact, reports are often limited, 
biased and of poor quality. The area of investigative journalism is virtually non-existent in 
Curaçao. 
  
 
CIVIL SOCIETY 
 
Key strengths 
 There are no significant hurdles to the formation and operation of CSOs, and strong provisions 
are in place to prevent undue external interference or the threat of political or arbitrary 
dissolution. 
 
Key weaknesses 
 A large proportion of CSOs lack adequate resources and depend on external financiers to 
operate.  
 There is limited information available on the number and activities of CSOs in Curaçao. It is 
difficult to determine their exact role in the integrity system.  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
235 
CURAÇAO 
 

 
1. Curaçao must ratify the United Nations Conventions Against Corruption as a matter 
of urgency and develop an action plan to ensure implementation and compliance. 
 
 
2. All sectors of society must strive to increase the levels of transparency in their 
activities, internal procedures and funding sources. Given the pivotal role played 
by political parties in the Curaçao NIS, the transparency of political party financing 
requires particular attention. 
 
 
3. The Government should prioritise funding and capacity building of law 
enforcement agencies to enable them to effectively conduct investigations and 
follow-up on cases put forward by Curaçao’s active watchdog and oversight 
agencies. 
 
 
4. Given the central role of the public sector in Curaçao’s NIS, the Government must 
work to ensure greater independence and accountability of the public sector, 
ensuring that principles of proper administration are adhered to, that all internal 
mechanisms to ensure accountability and integrity are in place, and that 
compliance with these mechanisms is monitored and sanctions imposed where 
necessary.  
 
 
 
More challenging perhaps, but equally important is to work on strengthening the foundations of the 
new country, in particular, trust. As mentioned in the chapter on Curaçao’s foundations, the level of 
interpersonal trust in Curaçao is not high. This is a major obstacle for any effective programme to 
address corruption and promote good governance. There is a general lack of trust in Curaçao’s 
institutions and in the people who are running them. Many people are not in a good position to 
challenge misconduct of those in power, and accountability mechanisms in place are not sufficiently 
supported. Curaçao is also not especially strong in educating the next generation on good 
governance and anti-corruption. Instead, because of a lack of trust, investment in the many talented 
young people in Curaçao is too low, which lays the ground for weaknesses of the Curaçao National 
Integrity System of tomorrow.  
To increase the level of formal trust means to ensure proper procedures, to engrain integrity into the 
country’s institutions, to ensure adequate accountability provisions including whistleblowing 
provisions, and to increase transparency, including transparency on procedures followed, across the 
board. Some advances in the Curaçao National Integrity System of 2013 will need some time, but 
others can be realised today.  
The recommendations presented below for each pillar focus on the key areas of weakness identified 
in the integrity system of Curaçao. Other suggestions for improvement may be found in the 
assessments of the different pillars in Chapter VI, as well as in the Appendix to this report which 
contains some more general examples of concrete actions to improve a National Integrity System. 
 
 
LEGISLATURE (Staten) 
 
 Government and Parliament must ensure that all legislation, including all country and ministerial 
decrees, is published on the internet within clear and reasonable time limits and with clear 
sanctions for non-compliance. 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
237 
CURAÇAO 
 

 The Executive should draw up a follow-up implementation plan to monitor compliance with the 
corporate governance code for public companies and public foundations. 
 Government or the Executive should implement provisions incorporated in the corporate 
governance framework to ensure the drafting of specific functions profiles, and the introduction 
of an institution to periodically evaluate the functioning of board members of public companies 
and public foundations. 
 
 
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES (Public Prosecutor’s Office, KPC, Landsrecherche) 
 
 The Executive must provide for the allocation of adequate human and financial resources to 
ensure that the police forces (KPC and Landsrecherche) have the capacity to effectively 
conduct investigations and that the Public Prosecutor’s Office has the capacity to prepare ‘policy 
reports’ (bestuurlijke rapportage) on lessons learned from investigations.  
 Law enforcement agencies should provide training to police officials in the field of financial 
crime.  
 Law enforcement agencies should work towards greater transparency in their operations by 
proactively informing the public about working procedures and the conclusion of cases, and by 
providing annual reports within the prescribed time limit. 
 Law enforcement agencies should develop additional adminstrative steps to ensure effective 
follow-up on the registration of corruption cases.  
 
 
ELECTORAL MANAGEMENT BODY (HSB) 
 Government and Parliament must ensure the independence and integrity of the Supreme 
Electoral Council in the legal framework, including strengthening appointment, suspension and 
dismissal procedures. Government and Parliament must also ensure that HSB is given full 
authority to oversee the whole electoral process.  
 Government and Parliament must ensure that the electoral council has sufficient financial and 
human resources to carry out all its tasks, including those related to the finances of political 
parties, and ensure continuity of the board, for example requiring members of the electoral 
council to set up a roster for resignation. 
 The electoral council should evaluate each electoral process, and make those evaluations 
publicly available. 
 The electoral council must regularly publicly account for the use of its supervisory powers and 
the effectiveness of its supervision of the finances of political parties. The Government and 
legislature must ensure that the electoral council is provided with the authority to levy sanctions 
for non-compliance with legislative provisions on political-party financing. 
 
 
OMBUDSMAN (Ombudsman van Curaçao) 
 
 The Executive must ensure sufficient human resources for the Ombudsman, for example by 
providing the office with a larger budget to attract and retain qualified staff or by ensuring 
valuable sounding boards. 
 Government and Parliament should adapt the legislative framework to strengthen publication 
requirements of the Ombudsman. The publication requirements incorporated in the country 
ordinance Corporate governance, Article 4, may serve as an example. 
 The Ombudsman should publish all (anonymised) individual reports and announcements on the 
Ombudsman’s website, as well as the official reactions of administrative authorities to the 
Ombudsman’s recommendations. 
 The Ombudsman should include separate statistics on complaints and investigations related to 
suspected integrity breaches within the administration in his/her annual report. 
 
 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
239 
CURAÇAO 
 

 
MEDIA 
 
 In order to prevent (the perception of a) conflict of interest, there must be a clear division of 
roles and responsibilities between the licensing/supervision of broadcast media and the 
activities of the state-owned telecom provider.  
 Media must improve their internal governance procedures and work on internal integrity policies. 
 Media must professionalize by working according to basic principles in journalism (e.g. 
independence, objectivity, confidentiality). 
 An independent financial media fund (for example with donor funding) should be created to: 
 Professionalise the media through training on investigative research and ethical issues 
 Create opportunities for (new) media initiatives 
 
 
CIVIL SOCIETY 
 
 CSOs should improve their internal governance procedures and make these better known to the 
public.  
 CSOs should disclose information on finance related to their activities, personnel, and 
administration costs, including their own lobbying efforts and funding streams, to guarantee 
transparency of their links with stakeholders.  
 CSOs should implement clear and distinct whistleblowing policies as part of well-designed good 
governance codes, and make these publically available. They should provide protection for 
whistleblowers and sanctions for those who retaliate against them.  
 The Executive should create more opportunities and mechanisms to involve civil society in 
policy formulation. This would require publication or sharing of draft documents with sufficient 
time for comment and engagement of key groups earlier in the policy-formulation period.  
 
 
BUSINESS 
 
 Businesses should increase transparency regarding their annual reports and accounts and 
disclose forms of political engagement, such as funding or support for CSOs. Large companies 
should lead by example. 
 Businesses should implement clear and distinct whistleblowing policies as part of well-designed 
good governance codes and make these publically available. They should provide protection for 
whistleblowers and sanctions for those who retaliate against them. 
 Businesses should work on internal integrity policies, with (pre-) employment screening for 
personnel, a code of conduct and awareness training. 
 Government and Parliament should adopt a competition law and establish a competition 
authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
241 
CURAÇAO 
 

Jason Nisbet, former director of Immigration Services of Curaçao, interview 14 November 2012. 
Fred Breedijk, chair of the Curaçao Court of Audit, Bertus Vis and Louise Santine Jr., members 
of the Curaçao Court of Audit, Kessler Ersilia, secretary of the Curaçao Court of Audit, interview 15 
November 2012. 
Raynold Nivallac, former director of Gaming Control Board, interview 16 November 2012. 
Ton van der Schans, advocate general Joint Public Prosecutor Office of Curaçao, Sint Maarten 
and of Bonaire, Saint Eustatius and Saba, interview 16 November 2012. 
Frank Kunneman, former vice-president of the Advisory Council of the Netherlands Antilles 
(Curaçao), lawyer and professor of civil law at the University of the Netherlands Antilles, interview 16 
November 2012. 
Jaime Saleh, minister of state of Curaçao, former Professor of constitutional kingdom law at the 
University of Utrecht, former governor of the Netherlands Antilles, former president of the Joint Court 
of Justice Netherlands Antilles and Aruba, interview 19 November 2012. 
Dick Piar, procurator general Joint Public Prosecutor Office of Curaçao, Sint Maarten and of 
Bonaire, Saint Eustatius and Saba, interview 20 November 2012. 
Gregory Damoen, former director of finance, interview 20 November 2012. 
Anonymous, writer, former journalist, interview 20 November 2012. 
Liesbeth Hoefdraad, president Joint Court of Justice of Aruba, Curaçao, Sint Maarten and of 
Bonaire, Saint Eustatius and Saba, interview 21 November 2012. 
Mike Willemse, publisher and chief editor Antilliaans Dagblad, interview 21 November 2012. 
Eric Garcia, president and CEO at GIRObank NV, interview 26 November 2012. 
Geomaly Martes, managing director Administration’s internal auditor (Stichting Overheids 
Accountants bureau – SOAB), chair Supreme Electoral Council (Hoofd Stembureau ), interview 27 
November 2012. 
Roque Koeijers, former union leader and lawyer, interview 28 November 2012. 
Reginald Doran, director of the Netherlands Antilles Development Foundation (USONA), interview 
11 December 2012. 
Don Martina, former prime minister Netherlands Antilles, interview 10 December 2012.  
Bas Kooyman, board member Business Association Curaçao (Vereniging Bedrijfsleven Curaçao), 
interview 10 December 2012. 
Kenneth Valpoort, board member trade union federation Central General di Trahadonan di Corsow 
(CGTC), interview 11 December 2012.     
Alberto Romero, board member of financial supervision (College financieel toezicht – Cft), 
interview 7 January 2013. 
Renny Maduro, chairman supervisory board Central Bank Curaçao and Sint Maarten, interview 13 
February 2013.     
Jeffrey Sybesma, Ersilia De Lannooy, Gisah de Sousa-Hollander, Central Bank Curaçao and 
Sint Maarten, interview 26 February 2013. 
 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
243 
CURAÇAO 
 

ANNEX II: WRITTEN QUESTIONNAIRES 
The following people and organisations received a questionnaire and were asked to complete and 
return it. In some cases, those sent a questionnaire were also interviewed. In that case, the 
questionnaire was completed during the interview. The people or organisations in italics were 
repeatedly sent reminders to return the questionnaire, but did not do so.  
 
PILLAR 1: LEGISLATURE 
 
Jaime Saleh, minister of state of Curaçao, former professor of constitutional kingdom law at the 
University of Utrecht, former governor of the Netherlands Antilles, former president of the Joint Court 
of Justice Netherlands Antilles and Aruba. 
Arjen van Rijn, lawyer and professor of constitutional law and constitutional renewal, University of 
the Netherlands Antilles. 
 
PILLAR 4: PUBLIC SECTOR 
The (acting) secretaries general of the following ministries: 
 
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Traffic, Transport and Country Planning 
Ministry of Education, Science, Culture and Sport 
Ministry of General Affairs and Foreign Relations 
Ministry of Public Health, Environment and Nature 
Ministry of Social Development, Labour and Welfare 
Ministry of Economic Development 
Ministry of Justice 
Ministry Administration, Planning and Service 
Dutch Caribbean Accountants Association (DCAA) – public sector accountants 
 
 
PILLAR 8: SUPREME AUDIT AND SUPERVISION INSTITUTION PUBLIC SECTOR 
 
Curaçao Court of Audit (ARC) 
Administration’s internal auditor (SOAB) 
 
 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
245 
CURAÇAO 
 

 
PILLAR 13: PRIVATE SECTOR 
 
Curaçao International Financial Services Association (CIFA) 
Curaçao Bankers Association (CBA) 
Antillean Contractors Association (AVV) 
Dutch Caribbean Accountants Association (DCAA) – private sector accountants 
Business Association Curaçao (VBC)  
Chamber of Commerce and Industry (KvK) 
Curaçao Hospitality and Tourism Association (CHATA) 
Free Zone Association (Frezacur) 
Association of International Bankers (IBA)  
 
 
PILLAR 14: SUPERVISORY INSTITUTIONS (PRIVATE SECTOR) 
 
Gaming Control Board (GCB) – external view 
Gaming Control Board (GCB) – internal view 
Financial Intelligence Unit (MOT) 
Central Bank of Curaçao and Sint Maarten (CBCS) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
247 
CURAÇAO 
 

Richenel Ilario, Sindikato di Empleado den Bibienda (SEBI) 
Angelo Meyer, Petroleum Workers Federation of Curaçao (PWFC) 
Wim van Lamoen, Sindikado Trahadornan di Aduana I Fiskalia (STrAF) 
Kenneth Breemer, General Union Civil Servants (ABVO) 
Ronald Abrahams, Sindikado National General Police (NAPB) (9 September 2012) 
Wilfred Spencer, Curaçao Federation of Workers (CFW) 
Coromoto Maria, Union for Nursing Staff (CBV) 
Edmond Francisca, Sindikato Trahadornan di KAE (STK) 
Darius Plantijn, Sindikato di Trahadonan den Edukashon di Korsou (SITEK) 
 Wendell Meulen, Union General di Trahadonan di Korsou (UGTK/CADMU) 
 
Civil society organisations, 6 September 2012  
Ivan (Onny) Gonet, Frente Sivil 
Ruben Suriel, Fundashon Akshon Sivíl 
Dito Abbad, Kousa Komun 
Jeanette Bonet, Kòrsou Uní  
Joop Kusters, Kolaborativo 
Pastoor Simon Wilsoe, Konseho di Iglesianan di Korsou 
 
Business groups, 7 September 2012  
Peter Bongers, Dutch Caribbean Accountants Association (DCAA) 
Willem Jonckheer, Curaçao Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
Leo Rigaud, Curaçao Bankers Association (CBA) 
Deanna Chemaly, Curaçao Trade and Industry Association 
Michael Willem, Curaçao Trade and Industry Association (Curaçao Contractors Association, AVV) 
Lizanne Dindial, Curaçao Hospitality and Tourism association (CHATA) 
Ronald Irausquin, International Bankers Association (IBA) 
Etienne YS, Curaçao International Financial Services Association (CIFA)  
Nepomosino, Free Zone Association (FREZACUR) 
Caroline Fiévez, Antillean Lawyers Association (AJV) 
 
 
NATIONAL INTEGRITY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT 
 
249 
CURAÇAO 
 

Transparency International
International Secretariat
Alt-Moabit 96
10559 Berlin
Germany
Phone: +49 30 3438 200
Fax: +49 30 3470 3912
ti@transparency.org
www.transparency.org
facebook.com/transparencyinternational
twitter.com/anticorruption 
blog.transparency.org 

