SINT EUSTATIUS 
CARIBISCH NEDERLAND 
Aan: 	De staatssecretaris van BZK 
Dhr. Drs. R.W. Knops 
Ministerie van Binnenlandse 
Zaken en Koninkrijksrelaties 
Turfmarkt 147 
Postbus 20011 
2500 EA Den Haag 
Ref: 633/21 
Sint Eustatius, 15 november 2021 
V/74; 
Geachte heer Knops, dek-- efi
Hierbij bied ik u middels een vaststellingsbesluit de route-tijdtabel aan, zoals ik u tijdens mijn 
recente werkbezoek aan Nederland heb toegezegd. Nogmaals dank ik u hartelijk voor uw warme 
ontvangst aldaar. Uit mijn schrijven van 30 september jl. heeft u kunnen lezen hoe het proces van 
totstandkoming heeft plaatsgevonden en gaf ik u aan mij vast te houden aan de 
uitvoeringstaakstelling onder de vigerende Wet. Met dit probaat product maakt St. Eustatius een 
belangrijke stap met betrekking tot een ordentelijk proces onder de gewenste en duurzame 
bestuurlijke hervormingen op St. Eustatius. 
Het bespreken van de route-tijdtabel heeft niet geleid tot inhoudelijke wijzigingen en de daarbij 
genoemde streefdata. De Eilandsraad houdt vast aan de argumentatie zoals vastgelegd bij schrijven 
van 16 mei jl. en aan u aangeboden tijdens uw werkbezoek aan Sint Eustatius in dezelfde week. 
Gerelateerd daaraan heeft de eilandsraad op 14 oktober jl. twee moties ingediend, welke bijgaand 
ter kennisgeving aanhecht. 
*Conform article 6 law recovery provision Sint Eustatius 
— 	 _ 

The Island Council of the Public Entity Sint Eustatius in its meeting of Thursday, October 14, 2021; 
Considering, 
-that on February 7, 2018 the democratically elected government of St. Eustatius was removed from 
office by an act of parliament (Staten-Generaal), with both the island and executive councils being 
relieved of their duties under the Law Task Neglect; 
-that in 2020 the Law Task Neglect was replaced by the Restoration Law (Wet Herstel voorzieningen Sint 
Eustatius) that lays out a phased approach for the return of full democracy in St. Eustatius; 
-that on October 21, 2020 the population of St. Eustatius voted in an island council election and made a 
clear and decisive choice for democratie representation; 
-that the elected island council is not authorized in all areas of government policy as prescribed by the 
Wolbes and Finbes among others and thereby rendering it unable to respond adequately to the wishes 
of the people in many areas; 
-that this inability to respond adequately and effectively to the needs of the voters leads to a lengthy 
and continuing unhealthy alienation between the people and their elected representatives; 
-that additionally this alienation deprives the currently non-elected administration of broad support in 
the community; 
• 
for the most part consists of 
-that the remaining portions of phase 2 of the route map to democracy 
revising or setting policy and procedural guidelines, organizing courses and trainings for civil servants 
and political office holders and enacting of some island ordinances, activities that can be executed 
effectively alongside an elected government; 
-that the wishes of parliament and the island council to speed up the process toward democracy are not 
being taken seriously by the current administration and by extension the state secretary of Interior 
Affairs and Kingdom relations; 
-that based on the Wet Herstel voorzieningen Sint Eustatius this unhealthy, undemocratic, and 
undesirable situation could extend into 2025 resulting in a period of time, without a locally elected 
democratic government, unprecedented in the kingdom; 
Resolves, 
-To call on the parliament to condemn the unnecessarily prolonged Jack of democratic governance on St. 
Eustatius; 
-To call on the parliament to intervene in and speed up the process to return to full democracy on St. 
Eustatius by January 1, 2022 and end the current undemocratic existence of the people of St. Eustatius; 
-To call on the parliament to make all necessary means and resources available to make said accelerated 
return to democracy possible; 
-To can on parliament to reiterate the human rights the peoplesitart~ 
And goes over to the order of the day. 

Motion 
The Island Council of the Public Entity St. Eustatius in its public meeting of today, Thursday 
October 10 2021 
Considering that, 
- In February 2018 the law "Task Neglect St. Eustatius" has been implemented, whereby the 
national government intervened, a government commissioner appointed, and the local 
government has been put aside. 
- This law has been replaced in 2020 by the "Restoration Act St. Eustatius". 
- In October 2020 an island council has been elected with limited responsibility. 
- It is the genera! feeling of the island council that the process of a return to fuil local democracy 
is unnecessarily being prolonged, hereby withholding Statia's population the right to have their 
own democratic government. 
- The duration of this period without a local democratically elected government is already 
unprecedented in the history of the kingdom. 
Resolves 
To reject the route-timetable proposed by the government commissioner to the members of 
the island council on September 22" 2021. 
and goes over to the order of the day. 
CC: 
Second Chamber of the Dutch Parliament 
First Chamber of the Dutch Parliament 
Committee Kingdom Relations Second Chamber 
Committee Kingdom Relations First Chamber 
Staten van Curacao 
Staten van Aruba 
Staten van Sint Maarten 
Island Council Saba 
Island Council Bonaire 
The motion is accepted/rejected in the meeting of .1.. 
........... 
Q1,-.. 
vn 
4  'i\d-C2-'n 0 

1 
1Kiik hier om tekst in te voeren. 
Ensurement of 
Subject 	 Status Elaboration of activities 	Startdate Targeted milestones 	Enddate 	Overlap 
sustainability 
In phase 1 the Eletoral Law has 
been revised. Through home-to- 
home visits the PIVA 
(Persoonsinformatie-voorzieningen 
Nederlandse Antillen) has been 	 A revised and corrected 	 31 	Related to 
Phase 1.0: 1. 
Phase 2 is being thoroughly revised and updated. In 	 phase 2.0 
	 Electoral Register in 
Kiesregister december 
implemented. phase 2 a thorough investigation which the current PIVA is 	 in its 
	
compleet 
2021 
totality.  
has been taking place in order to 	 updated. 	
determine the completeness of the 
Electoral Register. The findings 
from this investigation are currently 
being implemented. 
By reallzing the 
reorganisation as well as 
the internat flow en'  
Phase 1.0: 2. 
The reorganisation will take place Related to 
government positions, in 
Reorganisatie 
1 september 
Completed. 
parallel to the process of revising Q3 2018 which the keypositions Phase 1.0, 
ambtelijk apparaat 
2019 
procedures and workinstructions. and advisory positions criteria 3. 
compleet 
are filled, the 
implementation power 
will be expanded. 
Phase 1.0: 3. 
The clarification and 
Procedures en 
The revision of the procedures and 
actualisation of the 
werkinstructies 
1 september Related to  
Completed. 
workinstructions of the government 2019 descriptions of the Phase 2.0, 
ambtelijke 
institution and griffie. procedures and 2019 criteria 1. 
organisatie en 
workinstructions. 
griffie gereed 
The adminstration of the 
The Rekenkamer Sint Eustatius will 
Phase 1.0: 4. 
oath of the temporary 14 mei Related to 
be operationalized through the 
Rekenkamer 
(Temporarily) completed. 2020 Phase 2.2, 
Rekenkamer-members by 
Rekenkamer Rotterdam for the first 
ingesteld criteria 3. 
the Government 
two years. 
Commissioner. 

3 
3KIik hier om tekst in te voeren. 
,:- 
ailDetermine legai 
In progress. 
asis of permits II 
2022.  
exemptions • ' 
5.570.727  
b) Digitalisation 
Phase 2.0: 3a. Annual evaluation of 
e application and administration 
actualisation an 
Administraties rogress. ± Q2 perrnits and exemptions 
of permits and exemptions will be IN e !ia n -4  
vergunningen rofessionalisation of 2022 and enumeration of all 
iigariávi~kiec 
of, 	a e •2 0 
.  
—nistr~
en ontheffings- BES-laws that apply to 
verlening Statie. 
n o e 
e): Map and 
enquire for more capacity on In progress. 
ptimalise application 
application and administration • 2022 
process 
processes. 
ed 
ire ie • rij svoenng as of Jan.  lst 2021. Subsidized p 
and ad  Klantencontact ganisations will have to hand in 
rocess- 
performance reports.  
g 
oe e - t 
Klantencontact, aluatie the efficiency of subsidies' 
r 	í. ey 	I 	!pok int. th 
. 
Phase 2.0: 3b. 
Subsidies 
incorporate • 
irectie Bedrijfsvoering It is expected to receive the-
recommendati , 
Klantencontact 
ommendations around Q4 2021 
d) Map and 
This depends on th 
irectie Bedrijfsvoering 
timalise applic 
recommendations made b 
Klantencontact 
process 
Algemenre Rekenkamer. 
a) Eliminate backlogs 
pertaining to the Kadaster Nederland All documents have been digitalised 
	Completed. 
Kadasterfunctle. 
Invest in local capacity for 
Phase 2.0: 3c. 
Criteria 1 of Kadaster Sint Eustatius, 
Kadasterfunctie b) Prepare 
Phase 2.0 SLA with Kadaster 
op orde Kadasterfunctie for 
A new website has been launched, 
Nederland. 
implementation of 
Kadaster Nederland new personnel has been hired and 	Completed. 
Kadasterwet BES on tariffs have been established. 
January lst 2021. 

5 
5KIik hier om tekst in te voeren. 
f) (Re)evaluate New priorities and new enforcement I 
priorities and Unit VTH, Bestuurscollege 
strategies to continue into Phase 	To be determined 
capacity 
2.1. 
After ending this phase a Koninklijk Besluit needs to be arranged and signed - This is proces that also takes time. 
Subject Elaboration of activities 	Responsibility 
Targeted milestones / product Timeframe Overlap with.. Ensurement of 
completion sustainability 
The program called "Statia is my 
Interpoint + Unit manager 	home: Guidelines how to be a 
a) Training for all civil 
Organisation 	
Phase 2.1: 1. good civil servant 2018-2019" will 
servants of the Public Entity 
Q3 2020 
Adjustments to the 
Development, Public 
Afronden 	be completed by all civil servants. 
Sint Eustatius. 
programma will be 
aangeboden Entity of Sint Eustatius 	As a resuit of this, a code of 
made following the 
opleidings- conduct is produced. 
Criteria 2 and 3 
evaluation 
programma 
of Phase 2.1 
concerning the 
ambtelijk 
Competence and 
vakmanschap 
Job Skills Matrix. 
ambtenaren 
b) Training for all employees 	
The NIMD will provide training en 
NIMD, Public Entity of Sint 
of the Public Entity Sint 	
dualism during a visit to Statia in To be determined 
Eustatius 	
Eustatius about dualism. 
	
2022. 

7 
7KIik hier om tekst in te voeren. 
will contribute to 
the relationship 
Extensive training on the WoIBES, 
between the Island 
FinBES, the Restoration Law, the 
Council and the 
b) After installation, Island 
basics of the state structure and 
Government 
Deputees will have completed politics in the Kingdom of the 
Commissioners. 
a training on democratic 
Netherlands, dualism, negotiation 
governance, politics and the NIMD and cooperation with the To be determined. 
specific practice on the role European part of the Netherlands 
of island deputy on Sint and party strategy vs. local 
Eustatius. 
government strategy. Courses are 
subjected to change and will be 
further defined. 
c) Completion of training on 
Necessary training on dialogue 
dialogue and conflict 
and conflict resolution is 
resolution for all Island 
completed by all Island Council 
Council members, the Starting as soon as 
members, the Government 
Government Commissioner, NIMD 
possible / To be 
Commissioner, the Deputy 
the Deputy Government determined 
Government Commissioner and 
Commissioner and other 
other relevant members of the 
relevant members of the 
government. 
government. 
A platform on which facilitates 
d) Completion of a temporary 
dialogue for all Island Council 
platform for dialogue voor 
members, the Government 
Island Council Members, the 
NIMD 
Commissioner, the Deputy To be determined. 
Government Commissioner 
Government Commissioner and 
and other relevant members 
other relevant members of the 
of the government. 
government. 
a) Implement a new Unit manager By implementing an updated 
ordinance on personnel 
Organisation ordinance, the personnel policies A complete and 
Fase 2.1: Completed. 
management and personnel 
Development, Legal are adherent to present laws and legally justified 
Personeelsbeleid 
policies. 
Affairs reguliations. Criteria 2 of policy and process 
op orde en 
By implementing en Phase 2.0, for personnel and 
rechtspositionele 
organisational decree, the criteria 1 of management, 
regelgeving 
b) Determine and implement 
Unit manager 
organisational structure of the Phase 2.1 considering the 
opnieuw 
a decree on the structure of 
Q1 2022 
Organisation Development Public Entity of Sint Eustatius is new organisational 
vastgesteld. 
the organisation. 
structure. 
adherent to present laws and 
reguliations. 

9 
9Klik hier om tekst in te voeren. 
subsidy-proces c) Apply and incorporate recommendations made by 
Algemene Rekenkamer 
(see Fase 2.0), 
) Map and optimalise application process 
g) Improve 
Personnel- and 
Director B&K / 
salary- 	
administratiorb; 	 Unitmanager Financ 
h) Improve - 
administration 
of external 
locations of the 
u  •  ho Entit of 
Ensure 
Timeframe ment of 
Elaboration of 
Overlap with.. 
Responsibility 
Subject 
sustain 
activities completion 
abilit 
At this stage there is complete recovery. In this phase, the 
executive council and the island council again have 
responsibility for all their regular tasks such as budget 
law - and exercise their powers under the WolBES and the 
FinBES in a regular manner. The Rijksvertegenwoordiger is 
authorized to grant approval to decisions on appointment, 
suspension and dismissal of civil servants. Of observance 
of article 73 of the WolBES becomes a Ileutenant governor 
Phase 3.0 and appointed who exercises all duties and powers assigned to 
3.1: The him on the basis of legislation and regulations. Prior to the 
appointment it must have been apparent from the 
return of the 
Gezaghebber Governement Commissioner that the Executive Council to 
To be determined 
and the task belong and functions along the lines of the WolBES and 
of the FinBES and that It is also expected that a Gezaghebber will 
fulfill his duties and powers 
Rijksvertegen 
woor-diger. can properly fulfill. Until now, transition to this one phase 
5:1rresponsible. As soon as the lieutenant governor has been 
l,:approved by royal decree appointed, the situation is in line 
with the WolBES and the government commissioner will be 
i.relleved of his position. If all the tasks described above and 
powers are re-assigned by the relevant administrative 
•-,bodies performed, there is no Ionger any derogation from 
iArticles 125 and 127 in conjunction with Article 132a of the 
Constitution. 
Ensurement of 
Elaboration of Targeted milestones / 	Timeframe 
Overlap with.. 
Subject Responsibility 
activities product 	 completion sustainability 

