SINT EUSTATIUS
CARIBISCH NEDERLAND
Mr. R. Plasterk
Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom
Relations
Turfmarkt 147 | 2511 DP | The Hague
Postbus 20011 | 2500 EA | The Hague
The Netherlands
Ref.: 069/17
April 25th, 2017
Subject: violation of United Nations Charter and resolutions by the Government of the Netherlands
Dear Mr. Plasterk,
We have taken note of your undated letter to the Chairman of the Executive Council with reference
2017-0000162923. In response to said letter, and with reference to previous decisions of the Island
Council, as well as correspondence to you and Prime Minister Rutte (i.e. the letter of Island Council
Member Clyde I. Van Putten to Mr. Rutte dated April 17th, 2017), we hereby care to inform you as
follows from a general constitutional and legal perspective. We will respond to the content of said
letter in a separate letter.
Recently, the Charter of the Kingdom of the Netherlands ("het Statuut") was tested against the
Charter of the United Nations (UN Charter). This was done in light of the so-called "vrouwen van
Srebrenica"ruling of the Dutch Supreme Court (Hoge Raad) of April 13th, 2012. In said ruling, the
Supreme Court considered the following: "...moet worden vooroppesteld dat de VN onder de
international organisaties een bijzondere plaats inneemt...".
The Surpreme Court further considered."...sfe/f het EHRM onder meer vast dat art. 103 Handvest VN
naar de opvatting van het Internationaal Gerechtshof betekent dat de verplichtinQen die ingevolqe
dit Handvest rusten op de leden van de VN voorranq hebben boven daarmee striidipe verplichtingen
uit hoofde van een ander verdrag, ongeacht of dit werd pesloten voor of na het Handvest of slechts
een regionale regeling behelst...".
Said ruling has given us cause to test the "Statuut", the WolBES, and other legislation and decisions
of the Government of the Netherlands for compliance with article 73 of the UN Charter and UN
resolutions 742 (VIII), 747 (VIII) of 1953, and 945(X) of December 15th, 1955.
Resolution 742 refers to "obligations" based on UN Charter article 73, while resolution 747, sub 3,
states that the General Assembly (GA): "...Expresses to the Netherlands' Government its confidence
that, as a result of the negotiations, a new status will be attained by the Netherlands Antilles and
ST. EUSTATIUS - TEL: (599) 318- 2604/2906 - FAX: 0318-2228 - Email: office.islandsec@staliaqov.com

SINT EUSTATIUS
CARIBISCH NEDERLAND
We further urge the Government of The Netherlands to cease and desist from all interference in the
autonomous affairs of Sint Eustatius, taking into account the 2001 International Law Commission
(ILC) articles on the responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts. As a non-State we have
the right to pursue legal remedies for damages sustained due to violations of the abovementioned
articles, and we will endeavor to do such if and when the paramount interests of the people of Sint
Eustatius are jeopardized.
Notwithstanding the above, we will continue to work and dialogue with the Government of The
Netherlands in order to seek solutions for the current issues and improve the relationship between
The Netherlands and Sint Eustatius based on the principles of equality, mutual respect, and
transparency. This process, which should ultimately result in a full measure of self-government for
Sint Eustatius, should include an independent self-government assessment for Sint Eustatius, as was
done for Curacao in the recent past.
Our Commissionerof Constitutional Affairs and his delegation will be in The Netherlands during the
week of May8th, 2017, and we trust that you will extend the same hosptality and courtesies to the
Commissioner and his delegation as representatives of your and other ministries enjoy when visiting
Sint Eustatius.
The Commissioner's visit is an excellent opportunity to discuss these and other matters in person
and initiate the process of dialogue as discussed and agreed upon during the two visits of your
Secretary-General earlier this year.
Trusting to have informed you sufficiently, we remain,
Sincerely,
The Executive Council of Sint Eustatius,
Commissioner, //<p^S^=^"(^>fn The Island Secretary,,
Mr. C.A. Woodley
Simmons MtTk.A. Kerkhoff
ST. EUSTATIUS - TEL: (599) 318- 2604/2906 - FAX: 0318-2228 - Email: office.islandsec@statiaqov.com

