IMPLEMENTING 
THE OECD  
ANTI-BRIBERY 
CONVENTION 
PHASE 4 REPORT: 
Netherlands

This Phase 4 Report on the Netherlands by the OECD Working Group on Bribery evaluates and 
makes recommendations on the Netherlands' implementation of the OECD Convention on Combating 
Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions and the 2009 
Recommendation of the Council for Further Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in 
International Business Transactions. It was adopted by the 44 members of the OECD Working Group 
on Bribery on 16 October 2020.  
The report is part of the OECD Working Group on Bribery’s fourth phase of monitoring, launched in 
2016. Phase 4 looks at the evaluated country’s particular challenges and positive achievements. It also 
explores issues such as detection, enforcement, corporate liability, and international cooperation, as 
well as covering unresolved issues from prior reports. 
This document and any map included herein are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over 
any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any 
territory, city or area.

4        
 
ANNEX 3: LEGISLATIVE EXTRACTS ....................................................................................... 106 
ANNEX 4: DIRECTIVE ON LARGE TRANSACTIONS (OFFICIAL TRANSLATION) ....... 108 
ANNEX 5: LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS, TERMS AND ACRONYMS ..................................... 114 
 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

6  
The Working Group welcomes recent case law that confirms a broader approach to exercising jurisdiction 
over mailbox companies, and will continue to follow-up on corporate criminal liability as case law 
develops. Regarding sanctions, and even in the very limited number of concluded cases involving 
individuals, the available penalties and fines imposed in practice against natural persons may not be 
sufficiently effective, proportionate and dissuasive. Sanctions imposed on legal persons for foreign bribery 
in the context of non-trial resolutions have yielded very large fines but more clarity and transparency is 
required on the method for their calculation. The Netherlands has also been very successful at confiscating 
illegal proceeds of foreign bribery from legal persons. However, the Netherlands should resolve possible 
inconsistencies between law and practice in relation to the tax treatment of the confiscated proceeds.  
The report and its recommendations reflect the findings of experts from Estonia and Sweden and 
were adopted by the Working Group on 16 October 2020. The report is based on legislation, data and 
other materials provided by the Netherlands and research conducted by the evaluation team. The report is 
also based on information obtained by the evaluation team during its on-site visit to The Hague in 
February 2020, during which the team met representatives of the Netherlands’ public and private 
sectors, media, and civil society. The Netherlands will submit a written report within one year 
(October 2021) on progress with legislative reforms to its non-trial resolution framework and the 
amendment of the Whistleblowers Authority Act to implement the EU Whistleblower Protection 
Directive (Recommendation 2(a) and Recommendations 7(a)-(d)). Within two years (October 2022), the 
Netherlands will submit a written report to the Working Group on the implementation of all 
recommendations and its enforcement efforts. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 

8        
 
reopening due to the ongoing lack of jurisprudence on the foreign bribery offence and application of 
sanctions to natural and legal persons (all foreign bribery cases having been resolved out-of-court, to date) 
and the WGB’s commitment to equal treatment. 
5. The team for this Phase 4 evaluation of the Netherlands was composed of lead examiners from 
3
Estonia and Sweden, as well as members of the OECD Anti-Corruption Division. After receiving the 
Netherlands’ responses to the Phase 4 questionnaire and supplementary questions, the evaluation team 
conducted an on-site visit to The Hague from 10-14 February 2020. The team met with representatives of 
the Netherlands’ government, law enforcement authorities, the judiciary, the private sector (business 
associations, companies, financial institutions, lawyers and external auditors), as well as civil society (non-
4
government organisations, academia and the media).  The evaluation team expresses its appreciation to all 
the participants for their contributions to the open and constructive discussions. The evaluation team is also 
grateful to the Netherlands, in particular the Ministry of Justice and Security (MJS), Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, Dutch Public Prosecution Office and the Fiscal Intelligence and Investigation Service, for the 
exemplary cooperation throughout the evaluation, the organisation of a well-attended on-site visit, and the 
provision of additional information following the visit. 
Netherlands Economy and Foreign Bribery Risks  
6. In 2018, the Netherlands was the 14th largest economy in terms of GDP among the 44 Working 
Group members, the 17th largest economy in the world and in 2019, it was the fifth largest economy in the 
5 6
European Union (EU). In 2019, Dutch exports in goods and services comprised 83.3 per cent of its GDP. 
The Netherlands is also a key European transportation hub—the port of Rotterdam is the largest in 
Europe—and has a large volume of re-export activities. Its main exports include chemicals, refined 
petroleum, and electrical machinery, and it has a highly mechanised and profitable agricultural sector. The 
major services exports include business, professional and technical services, franchises (and similar rights), 
and air and sea transport. The Netherlands’ major export partners are EU member states (in particular 
7
Germany, Belgium and France), the United Kingdom, China and the United States. 
7. In 2018, the Netherlands was in second place globally behind the United States with 
USD 2 380 billion in outward foreign direct investment (FDI; stock at current prices). FDI flows to the 
Netherlands rose to USD 114 billion in 2018 (equal to 12.5% of GDP), up from USD 60 billion the previous 
8
year, against a backdrop of a general decline in FDI around the world. More than half of such investment 
has been in member countries of the EU (in particular Germany, Switzerland and Luxembourg), the United 
                                                      
3
 Estonia was represented by Mr. Tanel Kalmet Former Head of Division of the Penal Law and Procedure Division 
at the Ministry of Justice and Ms. Elina Elkind, Judge at the Harju County Court. Sweden was represented by Mr. 
Walo von Greyerz, Director at the Division for Criminal Law in the Ministry of Justice, Mr. Leif Görts, Chief 
Public Prosecutor at the National Public Prosecution Department and Ms. Ulrika Lyckman, Deputy Director, 
Department for Trade Promotion, Nation Branding and CSR. The OECD was represented by Ms. Leah Ambler, 
Coordinator of the Phase 4 Evaluation of the Netherlands; Ms. Alice Berggrun, Legal Analyst and Ms. Alejandra 
Tadeu, Legal Analyst, all from the Anti-Corruption Division, Directorate for Financial and Enterprise Affairs.  
4
 See Annex 2 for the agenda and list of participants in the on-site visit discussions. 
5
 Eurostat, “Which EU countries had the highest GDP in 2019?”, 8 May 2020. 
6
 Statistics Netherlands – CBS, Approaches of domestic product (GDP); National Accounts (2019, preliminary). 
7
 OECD Economic Surveys: Netherlands (OECD, 2018).  
8
 OECD (2020), FDI flows (Netherlands). doi: 10.1787/99f6e393-en (Accessed on 16 March 2020). 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

10        
 
measures to counter its use as a conduit jurisdiction, including reforms to its tax regime to implement the 
13
OECD Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) Project. 
Brexit: influx of UK companies to the Netherlands 
12. A recent and specific economic development which may call for extra resources connected to 
supervision of multinationals is the influx of British companies relocating to the Netherlands following the 
Brexit referendum in 2016. The Netherlands Foreign Investment Agency (NFIA) announced that a total of 
140 companies have opened offices or moved operations from the UK to the Netherlands and are expected 
to generate EUR 325 million in investment, predominantly in the finance, information technology, media, 
advertising, life sciences and health sectors. The NFIA is reportedly in discussion with another 425 
14
companies about making a similar move.  
Foreign Bribery Cases in the Netherlands  
13. The case information contained in this report is based on the evaluation team’s analysis of the 
Netherlands’ responses to the Phase 4 questionnaire, translated excerpts of court decisions and independent 
research. The Netherlands also provided anonymised data related to ongoing, terminated and concluded 
cases. There are 23 ongoing foreign bribery cases, 22 are at the investigation stage and 1 at prosecution 
stage, involving 40 individuals and 45 companies in the Netherlands. 
14. At the time of Phase 3 (December 2012), the Netherlands had not sanctioned any individuals or 
legal persons for the foreign bribery offence. The Netherlands reported four ongoing and four terminated 
investigations. Given the fact that there were no concluded cases, the Working Group expressed concern 
15
about the low level of enforcement, particularly considering the size of the Dutch economy. Since Phase 
3, there has been a marked increase in the number of investigations into foreign bribery and the Netherlands 
imposed significant sanctions in four high-profile cases, which were all concluded via non-trial resolution. 
As of October 2020, the foreign bribery enforcement situation in the Netherlands is as follows:  
 Foreign bribery investigations were concluded with sanctions against two individuals (NP) and 
seven legal persons (LP) by means of a non-trial resolution (Ballast Nedam (1LP); Vimpelcom 
(2LP); Teliasonera (3LP); SBM Offshore (1LP) Case A (2NP)); 
 No foreign bribery cases have been concluded following a criminal conviction at trial; 
 The Dutch authorities confiscated and forfeited assets valued at a total of USD 892.5 million 
(EUR 790.8 million, based on the exchange rate at the time of writing) from legal persons as 
proceeds of the foreign bribery offence;  
 Natural persons have not been subject to confiscation orders with respect to the instrument or 
proceeds of bribes to foreign public officials;  
 40 individuals and 44 legal persons are currently under investigation, and one company is the 
subject of an ongoing prosecution, for suspected bribery of foreign public officials in connection 
with 23 cases; 
                                                      
13
 OECD Economic Surveys: Netherlands (2018), pp. 34-35). 
14
 Reuters, “Brexit brings record number of businesses to Netherlands in 2019” (19 February 2020). 
15
 Sanctions were imposed against seven Dutch companies by means of non-trial resolutions in the context of the Oil-
for-Food cases. Although the case involved the payment of kickbacks in Iraq, the companies were sanctioned not for 
foreign bribery, but for violation of sanctions regulations. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

12        
 
2006 and 2012 to gain access to the market and obtain relevant licences. The bribes were paid through 
another of Vimpelcom’s subsidiaries, Unitel, and totalled USD 114.5 million. The bribes were paid to an 
offshore company established in Gibraltar (Takilant Limited) that was ultimately owned by the daughter of 
the President of Uzbekistan. The OM concluded that the bribes helped Unitel establish a dominant position 
in the Uzbek telecommunications market with significant profits. The case was detected through a 
combination of reports by international media, and information obtained by the tax administration and 
disclosed in incoming mutual legal assistance (MLA) requests, as the facts of the case were being 
simultaneously investigated in other WGB jurisdictions. Vimpelcom and its subsidiary were sanctioned by 
non-trial resolution in February 2016, as part of a joint agreement with the authorities in the Netherlands 
and the United States. The companies paid the Netherlands a fine of EUR 230 million and 
EUR 167.5 million in confiscation. Lawyers at the on-site visit reported—and prosecutors subsequently 
confirmed—that the case against the company’s CFO was dismissed on 17 January 2020 due to insufficient 
evidence to attribute knowledge of the criminal nature of the payments or intentional inaction to prevent 
the bribery.  
18. Teliasonera: The investigation in the Netherlands focused on three of Teliasonera’s subsidiaries, 
Sonera Holding BV, Teliasonera UTA Holding BV and Teliasonera Uzbek Telecom Holding BV. These 
subsidiaries were involved in bribe payments between 2007 and 2010 to gain access to the Uzbek 
telecommunications market, as for the Vimpelcom case. A total of USD 314.2 million was paid in bribes 
to Takilant Limited, including six per cent of the shares in the Rotterdam subsidiary Teliasonera Uzbek 
Holding. The companies also paid more than USD 27.3 million in ‘sponsorship’ and ‘charitable 
contributions’ in Uzbekistan between 2007 and 2013. Some of these payments were linked to Uzbek 
government officials. The three subsidiaries were sanctioned by means of a non-trial resolution in 
September 2017, as part of a joint agreement between the authorities in the Netherlands and the United 
States. The companies paid the Netherlands a fine of EUR 100 million and EUR 382.5 million in 
confiscation. 
b. Concluded cases of money laundering predicated on foreign bribery and passive 
bribery of foreign public officials 
19. KPMG: The criminal investigation focused on the role KMPG and three of its former partners 
played in concealing the payments by Ballast Nedam to foreign agents in the context of the Ballast Nedam 
case between the financial years of 2000-2003. The authorities in the Netherlands found that KPMG failed 
to comply with due care and integrity requirements and that it was actively involved in concealing the 
payment of the bribes. The company was sanctioned by means of a non-trial resolution in December 2013 
for forgery and money laundering offences, paying a fine of EUR 3.5 million and EUR 3.5 million in 
confiscation. The three natural persons were prosecuted on charges of money laundering but the Midden-
Nederland District Court, in a judgement on 19 April 2018, dismissed the proceedings. The Functioneel 
Parket (FP, National Public Prosecutor’s Office for Serious Fraud, Environmental Crime and Asset 
Confiscation) has appealed the decision. 
20. ING Bank: An investigation led by the OM and conducted by the FIOD and the police developed 
from other investigations into ING account holders (including Vimpelcom). It was revealed that hundreds 
of millions of euros were being laundered through the bank’s accounts. ING was not sufficiently 
investigating clients and monitoring bank accounts. It was also either failing to report unusual transactions 
or reporting them too late. The investigation uncovered structural failures in ING’s compliance policy; in 
particular, its client due diligence, and the bank was accused of violating the Dutch Anti-Money Laundering 
and Counter Terrorism Financing Act (Wet ter voorkoming van witwassen en financieren van terrorisme 
or Wwft). ING was also charged with negligent money laundering for failing to prevent bank accounts held 
by its clients from being used to launder money between 2010 and 2016. The bank was sanctioned by means 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

14        
 
foreign bribery investigation was not pursued due to lack of evidence, although the case is currently still 
ongoing regarding forgery offences.  
25. The flow chart in figure 2 shows the results of all the known investigations into foreign bribery 
in the Netherlands’ since the Convention came into force in 1999. 
Figure 2. The Netherlands foreign bribery enforcement since 1999 
4 cases concluded with 
7 LPs sanctioned for foreign 
sanctions through non-trial 
bribery
resolutions
Investigation terminated 
without sanctions against 7 
NPs in connection with two 
1 case with ongoing 
of these cases
prosecution against 1 LP*
30 formal investigations into 
foreign bribery
2 NPs sanctioned for 
22 cases with ongoing 
foreign bribery by non-trial 
investigations into 40NPs* 
resolution in an ongoing 
and 44LPs 
case
Investigation discontinued 
without sanctions against 2 
NPs and 2 LPs in two 
6 investigations discontinued 
ongoing cases
without charges
 
Note: Data to October 2020, numbers relate both to individual criminal proceedings and foreign bribery ‘case 
scenarios’; ‘NP’ and ‘LP’ stand for ‘natural’ and ‘legal’ persons, respectively. 
Source: Phase 4 evaluation case data. 
Commentary 
The lead examiners commend the increase in enforcement efforts in the Netherlands since Phase 3. In 
particular, the number of foreign bribery investigations opened since 2016 (18) is evidence of the 
effectiveness of the recent reorganisation of the investigative and prosecutorial framework. However, 
only three cases have been concluded with sanctions in the Netherlands since Phase 3, two of them in 
connection with the same facts. Enforcement against natural persons also remains low, with only two 
individuals sanctioned for the foreign bribery offence since the Convention entered into force and a 
number of proceedings discontinued or dismissed. Enforcement of the foreign bribery offence in the 
Netherlands remains low, especially in view of the size and specific risk profile of the Dutch economy. 
This report endeavours to identify the reasons behind the low rate enforcement and makes 
recommendations to address this concern. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

16        
 
characterised by large numbers of mailbox companies which can be misused in the context of bribery 
schemes. Reporting obligations under money laundering regulations are an essential part of detection since 
they cover TCSPs and other professional service providers who play an essential role in setting up and 
maintaining these companies. 
29. Additionally, there have been several legal and institutional developments in the AML framework 
since Phase 3. The Netherlands’ AML legal framework is set out in the Wwft. The Wwft has been amended 
a number of times since Phase 3, most recently by the 2018 Implementation Decree, which entered into 
force on 25 July 2018 and transposed the EU Directive 2015/849 of the European Parliament and the 
Council of 20 May 2015 (the fourth AML directive). The Wwft was further amended by an Implementation 
Decree that entered into force on 21 May 2020, transposing EU Directive 2018/843 of the European 
Parliament and the Council of 30 May 2018 (fifth AML directive). The Act Implementing a Register of 
Ultimate Beneficial Owners of Companies and Other Legal Entities, set to enter into force on 27 September 
2020, will also introduce further amendments to the Wwft (see below, Access to beneficial ownership 
information in the near future).  
a. The challenges of processing a dramatic increase in transaction reporting 
30. Reporting entities are broadly defined under the Wwft and include banks, other financial 
institutions and designated non-financial businesses and professional natural persons, such as accountants 
and lawyers, legal persons or partnerships in the context of their professional activities (article 1(1)(a)). 
These reporting entities must file unusual transaction reports (UTRs) immediately with the FIU as soon as 
(i) the unusual nature of the transaction becomes apparent and (ii) customer due diligence fails or a business 
relationship is terminated, and there are simultaneously indications that the customer in question may be 
involved in money laundering or terrorist financing. The report must be filed regardless of whether the 
transaction in question has already been completed or has merely been attempted (article 16(1) and (4).  
31. The BES islands have their own AML legislation, the BES Prevention of Money Laundering and 
Terrorism Financing Act (Wwft BES). Under this legislation, service providers established in the BES 
islands are required to report unusual transactions to the FIU Netherlands (article 3(2)). To facilitate 
reporting, the FIU Netherlands has established a permanent liaison officer on the islands. In 2019, the FIU 
23
Netherlands received 1 031 UTRs from the BES islands, of which 276 were declared suspicious. This 
represents a slight increase following a trend of progressive decline in the number of UTRs reported since 
24
2015. According to the FIU Netherlands, the agency has been focusing on improving the quality of the 
reports from service providers in the BES islands and will, “in due course”, focus on the quantity of the 
25
reports.  
32. Given the volume of UTRs submitted, the FIU conducts an initial filter through a Reporting and 
Analytical Tool, which became operational in 2014. This IT tool conducts automatic queries based on risk 
profiles developed by the agency. In 2017, the FIU prioritised the detection of corruption as a strategic 
theme. Four different queries were introduced in the FIU database, including definitions of corruption and 
countries and sectors of particular concern. These queries allow the FIU to prioritise corruption-related 
UTRs.  
                                                      
23
 FIU Netherlands 2019 Annual Report, p.48. 
24
 According to the information available in the FIU Netherlands annual reports: 2015 (1,285 UTRs), 2016 (1,281 
UTRs), 2017 (1,038 UTRs) and 2018 (993 UTRs). 
25
 FIU Netherlands 2018 Annual Report, p. 40. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

18        
 
information was required from them. The representative from the trust sector reported having a specific 
contact point within the FIU and very clear channels for feedback and providing information.  
b. An increase in FIU resources 
37. In addition to a large volume of UTRs, non-government representatives at the on-site visit 
unanimously expressed their concerns that the FIU does not have enough resources to process the number 
of reports it receives. The concerns over resources are not new, with the FIU indicating in Phase 3 that it 
was ‘tight’ with a staff of 57 people for an approximate number of 200 000 UTRs per year. Fastforward 
eight years, and the FIU currently has 63 full time employees and additional part-time employees to manage 
an increase of over two million UTRs (even though out of the 2 462 973 UTRs received in 2019, 1 921 737 
transactions were reported due to the objective reporting threshold regarding high risk countries). The 
Netherlands reports that the FIU will recruit 25 additional full-time employees (including data scientists 
and technology experts) following an increase in funding from EUR 6 million to EUR 9 million in 2020. 
The additional funding will also be used to invest in new technology and artificial intelligence to aid in data 
analysis.  
38. This increase in the FIU’s budget is linked to additional structural funds to implement the fifth 
AML directive, as well as to the Money Laundering Action Plan (MLAP), submitted to Parliament on 30 
June 2019 by the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Justice and Security. The MLAP provides for 
additional funding to the FIOD, TCA, FIU and OM of EUR 29 million from 2021 onwards inter alia to 
help in the fight against money laundering. The MLAP also mentions a national programme for 2019-2022 
to combat money-laundering set up by the OM in consultation with the police, FIU and FIOD. 
c. Encouraging effective reporting by the private sector 
39. In 2017, the FIOD, FP, FIU and the four main banks in the Netherlands established a public-
28
private partnership focusing specifically on corruption. The goal was to increase awareness of corruption 
within banks and to improve transaction monitoring to detect more corruption cases. The 2018 Annual 
29
Report of the FIU indicates that the pilot has produced very useable UTRs for further investigation. Based 
on the OESO and Egmont Group indicators, a ‘corruption query’ is made for banks to detect possible 
corruption cases and test its effectiveness, efficiency (not too many ‘false positives’) and added value 
(whether new cases are detected compared to current transaction and client monitoring). The FIU and the 
FIOD-ACC analysed the STRs in 2018 and 2019 possibly related to corruption in order to optimise the 
query. Furthermore, the FIOD-ACC has produced a ‘knowledge document’ in cooperation with the banks 
intended to increase awareness on corruption and detection of possible corruption cases for transaction 
monitoring analysts, customer due diligence and compliance officers within the banks. This ‘knowledge 
document’ was published in August 2020 and accompanied by a promotional video. 
40. Also within the financial sector, the Dutch Bankers’ Association announced on 8 July 2020 the 
creation of a joint body—Transaction Monitoring Netherlands (TMNL)—between five Dutch banks (ABN 
AMRO, ING, Rabobank, Triodos Bank and de Volksbank) to conduct collective transaction monitoring 
30
and share information with a view to easier and more effective tracking of criminal funds. The banks have 
involved the FIU, OM, Ministry of Finance and MJS in the project and an amendment of the Wwft will be 
                                                      
28
 The participating banks are ABN AMRO, ING, Rabobank and the Volksbank. 
29
 FIU-The Netherlands Annual Report 2018, p. 11. 
30
 Dutch Bankers’ Association website, “Transaction Monitoring Netherlands: a unique step in the fight against 
money laundering and the financing of terrorism” (8 July 2020). 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

20        
 
transaction monitoring is also an impressive development. Of particular importance is the increase in 
financial and human resources in the FIU, considering the practically unanimous view that these were, 
until this moment, insufficient. This welcomed increase in resources will hopefully improve the FIU’s 
capacity to process UTRs.  
Consequently, the lead examiners recommend that the Working Group follow up on whether the increase 
in resources enhances FIU-the Netherlands’ ability to process UTRs and provide feedback on their 
overall quality to the private sector, as it relates to the detection of foreign bribery. Given the essential 
role of the legal profession in setting up corporate structures and the particular risk these structures pose 
in the Dutch economic context, the lead examiners further recommend that the FIU increase its 
awareness-raising efforts with the legal profession on AML reporting obligations and specific exceptions 
for lawyers, as well as red flags for foreign bribery-based money laundering.  
A.2.  Detection by the Tax Authority 
45. The FIOD is the criminal investigation service of the TCA. A dedicated Anti-Corruption Centre 
(ACC) was established within the FIOD and became operational in September 2016. Its mandate is to 
investigate foreign and commercial bribery cases (see also, Investigating Foreign Bribery). According to 
representatives at the on-site, the FIOD-ACC is starting to institutionalise its foreign bribery detection 
capacity, as well as train other agencies on detection. The TCA has specific tax auditors who work with 
large companies and who FIOD-ACC trains to detect and report red flags for corruption, however the 
specific legislation governing the TCA and the nature of tax audits present certain hurdles. According to 
the questionnaire responses, the Netherlands indicates that the TCA may find evidence of bribery when 
investigating the accuracy and completeness of tax returns; verifying expenses; or monitoring transfer 
pricing among large international corporate groups. Although TCA staff are bound by a duty of 
confidentiality (article 67, General State Taxes Act (AWR)), this duty can be lifted in cases where a serious 
criminal offence (including foreign bribery) may have been committed (article 161 Dutch Criminal 
Procedure Code (DCPC); article 43c implementing regulation AWR).  
46. The Minister of Finance has issued guidance on how tax officials should report suspected crimes 
to criminal law enforcement agencies. This procedure involves contacting the FIOD or OM liaison officer 
within the TCA before reporting to the OM and it applies to specified crimes including: bribery, private-
sector corruption (public corruption is already covered by a legal reporting obligation), laundering of the 
proceeds of non-tax offences, and terrorist financing. At the time of Phase 3, the Ballast Nedam case was 
the first foreign bribery case to be detected by the TCA. Since then, the TCA has referred three foreign 
bribery cases to the OM. One of these cases has been concluded (Vimpelcom case) and the other two are 
the subject of ongoing criminal investigations. The cases were detected respectively through information 
uncovered examining bank accounts of individuals and companies not registered in the Netherlands; an 
assessment of a company’s tax return (namely, strange movement of shares within the company and its 
subsidiaries) and an investigation into transfer pricing. As noted below (Self-Reporting), the TCA also 
detected the foreign bribery in the Ballast Nedam case following an inquiry into the administration of 
foreign entities, after which Ballast Nedam self-reported to the OM. 
Commentary 
The lead examiners commend the Netherlands’ tax authority for a proactive approach to detection, 
resulting in the referral of foreign bribery cases to law enforcement authorities, or indeed companies 
taking the initiative to self-report.  
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

22        
 
detriment to their legal status either during or after the period in which this report is dealt with by the 
competent authority or agency. The OM has published internal instructions to provide guidance for 
protected reporting under the WAA to its employees. 
ii. Disclosures made on “reasonable grounds” and “in good faith” 
51. Under the WAA, “whistleblowing” occurs when an “employee” reports a “suspected abuse” to 
36
the organisation (article 1(d)). Under the WAA, a disclosure will only be investigated—and a reporting 
person only be entitled to protection—if the report is made on “reasonable grounds” and a “public interest 
is at stake”. It is not clear whether this provision could be interpreted to impose additional conditions on 
the manner in which whistleblowers must make reports in order to be protected under the WAA. There are 
other provisions in Dutch law that provide parallel—and contradictory—frameworks for protected 
reporting. This is even more important given that other applicable legislation requires that the report be 
37
made in ‘good faith’, a higher standard than that of ‘reasonable grounds’, set out in the WAA. There are 
therefore differing thresholds for protection creating legal uncertainty for whistleblowers. 
52. In practice, however, it is not clear that the “reasonable grounds” standard sufficiently protects 
whistleblowers while they still carry the burden of proving the validity of their report. The Whistleblowers 
Authority has not referred any cases of retaliation against whistleblowers to the civil courts; it is therefore 
untested whether a whistleblower must prove retaliatory intention on behalf of the employer in order to 
claim remedies for retaliation. Caselaw developments should be followed to ensure Dutch civil courts are 
evaluating whether whistleblowers had adequate reasons to make their reports, rather than the accuracy or 
pertinence of the disclosures. The Netherlands indicates that this issue will be resolved when the EU 
Directive is transposed, along with its requirement to shift the onus of proving the retaliation was not linked 
to the report to the employer. 
53. Additionally, the WAA (article 7) requires the investigation department of the Authority to give 
notice to the employer of the report, which could potentially expose the whistleblower to retaliation. This 
risk seems more concrete given that in 2014, SBM Offshore filed a defamation suit in Monaco and the 
Netherlands against an employee who recorded the meeting that lead to the uncovering of bribery of foreign 
public officials by the company and subsequently disclosed it to journalists. The recording would form part 
of a body of evidence used by a Dutch magazine, Vrij Nederland, in 2017 to claim SBM Offshore tried to 
conceal certain bribery allegations. The employee left SBM Offshore in 2012 following a dispute over the 
38
handling of the investigation. In August 2020, he was arrested in Croatia while on holidays following an 
Interpol Red Notice issued by Monaco for the defamation suit lodged by SBM Offshore in 2014. Civil 
society organizations have called on Monaco authorities to immediately withdraw all charges against the 
whistleblower and allow him to return home. Civil society organisations have also voiced concerns on the 
situation of whistleblowers in the Netherlands, in particular, the mechanisms used by companies to 
39
intimidate and silence whistleblowers who speak out in high-profile foreign bribery cases. Whistleblowers 
have also been the subject of political pressure and interference. In July 2019, the Dutch Foreign Ministry 
fired a former senior policy advisor at the Dutch embassy in Nigeria who reported to the Embassy’s police 
                                                      
36
 WAA, Section 1 (d).  
37
 WAA, Chapter 3, Section 18  modifying Article 658c of Book 7 of the Civil Code; Section 47 (3) of the Police Act 
2012 and section 12quater, second paragraph and 12o, fifth paragraph of the Defence Civil Servants Act. 
38
 Global Investigations Review, “Inside a company’s decision to self-report bribery” (1 August 2018). 
39
 ECPMF, “MFRR partners an call on Monaco to withdraw arrest warrant on oil industry whistleblower Jonathan 
Taylor” (14 August 2020) 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

24        
 
the central government and the National Police. The General Military Civil Service Regulations (chapter 
11c, paragraph 3), the Central Employment Agreement ‘CAO Rijk’ (chapter 13) and the General Police 
Decree (chapter VII. a, paragraph 2.3) allow for compensation of costs related to workplace harassment 
proceedings and/or legal aid. This compensation is not available for other employees in the private and 
public sector.  
b. The Whistleblowers Authority 
59. The WAA mandates the Authority to provide advice and support to whistleblowers and conduct 
investigations into reported wrongdoing and alleged retaliation, if no other Dutch authority is mandated to 
investigate or take measures (WAA, article 6). Dutch authorities assert that the Authority can commence 
its investigation into the reported retaliation regardless of whether the organisation has commenced its own 
internal investigation into the report, or other authorities have planned or commenced criminal 
investigations. The Authority has three departments: the advice unit (advising potential whistleblowers on 
legal requirements for reporting), the investigative unit (investigates allegations of retaliation and reports 
of wrongdoing) and the prevention unit (advises employers on matters concerning integrity management, 
including the implementation of reporting mechanisms). The Authority also advises employers on 
implementing internal reporting mechanisms. The Authority has around 25 full time employees.  
60. The services provided by the Authority are confidential, independent and free of charge for 
whistleblowers and employers. The Authority is statutorily independent; its board members and chairperson 
are appointed by Royal Decree, although it is administratively dependent on the Ministry of Interior and 
Kingdom Relations. Even though Parliament can only hold the Minister accountable, the agency delivers 
an annual report to Parliament. It has an annual budget of approximately EUR 3.5 million. Since the 
Authority became operational in 2016, until (and including) 2019, the Authority has received 70 requests 
to conduct investigations. Nineteen of these requests concerned an alleged retaliation and 28 concerned a 
potential wrongdoing as well as an alleged retaliation. Fourteen requests have been further investigated and 
five reports have been made public. In one case, the investigators found proof of unfair treatment 
(retaliation). The Authority has received 23 requests to investigate a potential wrongdoing (without 
retaliation issues), three of which have led to an investigation being conducted. The lead-time for an 
investigation varies and is often a year or more. The report on the ‘Evaluation of the Whistleblowers 
Authority Act’ published in June 2020 noted that that the average turnaround time in practice for the 
 41
investigative report is considerably higher than the statutory limits. The statutory period of six weeks had 
not been met three out of four times and the target period of one year had not been achieved four out of 
four times. Because the lead times of the admissibility assessment and the investigation are long, there is a 
danger that once the report is ready, the problem will no longer be relevant or that the consequences for the 
whistleblower are severe. Since 2016, the Authority has received 1 703 requests for advice on cases of 
potential wrongdoings/retaliation.  
61. The Authority is failing to meet expectations due to its limited mandate. Civil society and private 
sector representatives at the on-site visit cited the lack of legal remedies and protections afforded to 
whistleblowers under the WAA and expressed concerns about the organisation of the Authority. 
Particularly, they mentioned the potentially conflictual role it has in investigating retaliation by companies 
against employees who report wrongdoing, whilst giving recommendations on protected reporting 
mechanisms to those same companies. Civil society organisations considered that most of the problems 
related to the Act stemmed from the lack of public consultation on the draft before enactment. Of particular 
concern is the Authority’s mandate to investigate the reports of wrongdoing it receives, including potential 
foreign bribery (WAA articles 1(d) and 3a(3)). The Authority does not have the technical experience or 
                                                      
41
 Report 'Evaluation of the Whistleblowers Authority Act', Kwink Groep, 2020.  
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

26        
 
the Whistleblowers Authority (article 3.3) only allows the OM to request information from the Authority’s 
Investigations Department and not from the Advice Department, which works with confidential 
information. To date, only one case reported to the Authority related to economic crime has led to the 
opening of a criminal investigation (fraud case referred to the Rijksrecherche). Investigators from the FIOD 
voiced concerns about the impact the law has on potential whistleblowers, given that except in cases where 
an employee can prove that s/he could not reasonably be asked to report internally first, that employee is 
expected to  go through her/his own company with a report instead of directly contacting external law 
enforcement agencies. Dutch authorities assert that this situation will change with the transposition of the 
EU Whistleblower Protection Directive and a whistleblower will be able to report internally or externally 
47
according to her own choice. 
e. Promising reforms planned for the WAA and the Authority  
64. The functioning of the Authority has been evaluated twice by the National Ombudsman, which 
advised providing relevant information to the whistleblower including referrals to relevant organisations 
and if necessary assuming a mediating role. The Ombudsman also recommended greater cooperation 
between the advice and investigation departments and the board. Additionally, legal and social 
psychological assistance for whistleblowers should be available through external providers.  A draft bill 
amending the WAA and other relevant laws to implement the Directive was opened for public consultation 
from 31 July to 10 September 2020 but did not address the findings of the ‘Evaluation of the Whistleblowers 
 48
Authority’ conducted in June 2020.  The Netherlands indicates that the draft will be reconsidered in light 
of comments received and then follow the normal legislative process. A further evaluation of the WAA was 
published in June 2020 and an additional report was expected to follow in September 2020. The Netherlands 
indicated that additional draft legislation would be prepared to take into account the results of these 
evaluations.   
65. The bill on ‘Amendment of the Whistleblowers Authority Act’, as published for consultation, 
49
seems limited in scope. In particular, the absence of sanctions for retaliation against whistleblowers. 
Furthermore, the bill mandates eight different authorities to investigate reports. How these institutions are 
to coordinate investigations and assure equal treatment and protection of whistleblowers remains unknown.  
The bill does introduce some positive measures to transpose the EU Directive, such as a presumption in 
favour of the whistleblower with respect to retaliation and a provision for the Authority to refer 
whistleblowers to agencies that can provide legal or psychosocial support. The bill also creates a new test 
for reporting, based on “reasonable grounds to believe the … information is correct”, removing the previous 
references to the “in good faith” standard for reporting.  
66. The need for amendments to the WAA Act was confirmed by Authority representatives, who 
during discussions recognised that strengthened legislation would be highly beneficial, along with the 
necessary resources to implement such changes. Government representatives, civil society and the 
Authority itself stated that a more fundamental revision of the WAA and the Authority was required. In 
particular, civil society organisations considered that a complete overhaul of the WAA would be necessary 
to bring it into line with the new EU Whistleblower Protection Directive. 
                                                      
47
 Directive (EU) 2019/1937 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2019 on the protection of 
persons who report breaches of Union law.  
48
 Report 'Evaluation of the Whistleblowers Authority Act', Kwink Groep, 2020. 
49
 Amendment of the Whistleblowers Authority Act to implement EU directive, July-September 2020 (in Dutch). 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

28        
 
into consideration to mitigate sanctions. The Dutch authorities indicated that suspects who self-report could 
expect prosecutors to consider certain factors in deciding the penalties to be requested in court or offered 
in non-trial resolutions, such as acknowledgment of the offences; measures to ensure future compliance; 
internal investigation and cooperation; willingness to compensate for damages and recidivism.  
70. As emphasised by members of the legal profession at the on-site, companies have no certainty 
that prosecutors will offer a non-trial resolution when they self-report and indeed some cases have been 
resolved out-of-court in the absence of a self-report by the company involved (e.g. Vimpelcom and Telia). 
Private sector and legal representatives considered that the uncertainty of the consequences of a self-
report—including in the context of facts that involve several countries and may result in multijurisdictional 
proceedings—deters a number of companies from coming forward. Prosecutors at the on-site visit indicated 
that when a company self-reports, and depending on the facts of the case, they may advise it to also approach 
other national law enforcement authorities. Companies and business associations considered that there were 
insufficient incentives for self-reporting, compared with other jurisdictions that offer settlements or 
declinations for companies that self-report, self-remediate and cooperate. Another concern with self-
reporting relates to how it could potentially expose an auditor to liability for audit opinions issued during 
the period subject to self-report, or indeed incriminate natural persons. Participants in the on-site visit—
including prosecutors—were unanimous that guidance on self-reporting was necessary. Specifically, 
prosecutors mentioned the need for guidelines on procedures for non-trial resolutions in the context of a 
self-report by a company. 
Commentary 
The lead examiners welcome the use of self-reporting as a source of detection of foreign bribery cases 
in the Netherlands. However, self-reporting has only resulted in the detection of a small number of cases, 
to date. There appears to be a general reluctance to make self-reports given uncertainty about the 
consequences and the lack of an overarching legal framework. The lead examiners therefore recommend 
that the Netherlands establish a clear policy and guidelines explaining the extent to which self-reporting 
will be considered in resolving and sanctioning foreign bribery cases. Furthermore, they encourage the 
OM to provide guidance on procedures for self-reporting. Finally, they note that the uncertainty of 
facing multiple proceedings in various countries may create a disincentive for self-reporting to 
enforcement authorities.  
A.5.  Detection and Reporting by Accountants and Auditors 
71. The 2009 Recommendation on Further Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials encourages 
Parties to require external auditors to report indications of suspected bribery to corporate management and, 
if appropriate, corporate monitoring bodies and to consider requiring reporting to external law enforcement 
authorities. As noted above (Netherlands Economy and Foreign Bribery Risks), gatekeepers play a key role 
in facilitating possible foreign bribery offences from the Netherlands, particularly in their role as TCSPs 
for mailbox companies. The accounting and audit profession falls under this category and can be an 
important source of detection.  
72. In Phase 3, the Working Group recommended that the Netherlands ensure that the foreign bribery 
offence and the accounting and auditing requirements of the Convention were covered in training 
programmes and related guidelines for the accounting and auditing profession, in order to facilitate a more 
active role in detecting foreign bribery (Recommendation 6(a)). At the time of the Written Follow-up, the 
Working Group noted that the Royal Dutch Professional Association of Accountants (NBA) had developed 
a draft guideline on training auditors to detect foreign bribery but that the training itself would not be 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

30        
 
Chamber ruled on a disciplinary action (namely, a reprimand) brought by the AFM against PwC auditors 
for Dutch company SHV and its Middle Eastern subsidiary, Econosto, for failing to report cash 
commissions of over EUR 3 million paid to third parties which raised red flags for fraud and corruption 
between 2007 and 2014. In its decision, the Chamber exonerated the group auditor for the parent company 
on the basis that the amount of the alleged cash payments was immaterial to the overall group financial 
statements and that the audit measures taken were adequate, but upheld the action brought against the 
52
auditor of the subsidiary. The AFM may appeal the decision. The outcome of these disciplinary 
proceedings (reprimand for the subsidiary auditor and exoneration for the group auditor) do not send a 
strong signal to the audit profession about its responsibility to detect and report suspected foreign bribery. 
Both companies are the subject of criminal investigations into possible foreign bribery offences arising 
from these facts; however, it is unclear whether the auditors are also under criminal investigation.  
77. Representatives of the audit profession at the on-site visit noted that there was an increasing 
amount of guidance and training from supervisory and law enforcement authorities (AFM; NBA; FIOD 
and FIU) focusing on the role of the profession in detecting corruption and money-laundering. They 
considered that progress had been made, evidenced by more risks identified in company financial 
statements and more frequent issuing of qualified audit opinions. They also seemed very conscious of the 
threat of potential liability, noting that, “in a corruption investigation, the first thing that the prosecutors 
do is to look at the gatekeepers involved”. Despite the significant regulatory changes, institutionalised 
guidance and training and a clear criminal justice policy of prosecuting accountants and auditors for their 
role in foreign bribery cases, prosecutors and investigators at the on-site visit had not seen an uptake of 
direct auditor reporting. Auditors made five reports of suspected fraud to police in 2018 and one fraud 
report in 2019. Law enforcement officials were of the view that if auditors are going to report, they will 
most likely report to the FIU. Until 2018 auditors reported approximately 1 100 unusual transactions 
annually to the FIU. In 2018 the number of UTRs submitted by auditors increased to 1 987 and in 2019 to 
3 444. This increase is partly due to a new objective reporting threshold in relation to the high-risk countries 
designated by the European Commission (see Detection through the Dutch AML framework). In 
comparison, between 2012 and 2016 auditor UTRs resulted in 70 STRs disclosing corruption offences that 
were not already the subject of a criminal investigation.  
Commentary 
The evaluation team congratulates the Netherlands for its significant efforts to address the role of 
accountants and auditors as ‘gatekeepers’ for the financial system and in light of the role they play in 
auditing various legal entities, including mailbox companies. They welcome the impressive array of 
regulatory and case law advances coupled with awareness raising initiatives undertaken by supervisory 
authorities, professional bodies and law enforcement agencies since Phase 3 and consider 
Recommendation 6(a) fully implemented. The auditing profession submits a substantial number of UTRs 
to the FIU annually; however there is minimal direct reporting to criminal law enforcement agencies.  
A.6.  Increasing detection through other potential sources  
78. In Phase 3, the lead examiners noted that while the Dutch authorities could open investigations 
based on a wide range of possible sources, the number of investigations remained low. The Working Group 
therefore recommended that the Netherlands proactively gather information from diverse sources at the pre-
investigative stage to increase the sources of allegations and to enhance investigations (Recommendation 
                                                      
52
 AFM website, “AFM partially successful in disciplinary action against SHV accountants PwC” (17 June 2020, in 
Dutch). 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

32        
 
impact, for example in 2019 the focus was on auditors or ‘gatekeepers’, and in 2020 on healthcare and 
trusts.  
c. Media  
83. In the Netherlands, media reports of alleged foreign bribery can be used to open investigations as 
long as they are sufficently detailed and can be verified. Law enforcement authorities will attempt to 
substantiate claims in the media with other independent sources before moving forward to a formal 
investigation. The Vimpelcom and Teliasonera cases were initiated partly on the basis of investigative 
journalism in Sweden. There are two ongoing foreign bribery investigations which were detected through 
media reports and a third case where the investigation started from information obtained both from the 
media and from an MLA request. According to the questionnaire responses, the reports on two of these 
investigations originated from domestic media and the remaining three from international media. The FIOD 
and FP monitor media and civil society reporting on a daily basis. The authorities in the Netherlands also 
report that the Matrix of alleged foreign bribery cases maintained by the OECD is used to obtain information 
on corruption indicators and criminal procedures in other countries dealing with the same entities. 
Investigative journalism has been very active in the Netherlands in uncovering and reporting allegations of 
foreign bribery. Media representatives at the on-site visit demonstrated impressive awareness of issues 
covered by the Convention. 
84. In 2020, the Netherlands ranked 5 out of 180 countries for the most free press, in the Reporters 
53
without Borders World Press Freedom Index. Following a rise in online threats, in 2018 the government 
instituted a new policy whereby all criminal complaints filed by a journalist have to be thoroughly 
54
investigated. The Netherlands appears to have in place a robust legal framework to protect freedom of the 
press, particularly since the entry into force of the Source Protection in Criminal Matters Act, on 1 October 
2018. This Act, which amended the Code of Criminal Procedure, establishes that journalists summoned as 
witnesses may refuse to answer questions from the judiciary that may compromise the confidentiality of 
their journalistic sources. In line with the case-law of the European Court for Human Rights, this refusal 
may be overruled by the court if the magistrate considers that that there is an overriding requirement of the 
public interest that outweighs the right of non-diclosure.  
85. Of particular concern is the fact that witnesses may be held in detention by the court if they refuse 
to respond to the judge’s questions. In 2019, following the entry into force of the new protections, telephone 
conversations between a journalist and his source were intercepted in the context of a murder investigation. 
The journalist was called as a witness in the trial and, on 24 October 2019 was detained for 36 hours by the 
Rotterdam District Court for refusing to provide information on the source despite invoking the provisions 
55
establishing source protection.  
Commentary 
The lead examiners welcome the strong legal framework in place to protect freedom of the press in the 
Netherlands, along with regular monitoring of the media by law enforcement authorities as a source of 
detection. They are, however, concerned about reports of a journalist being detained for not identifying 
his sources, in a case unrelated to foreign bribery. The lead examiners will follow-up to ensure that 
                                                      
53
 Reporters without borders, Netherlands 2020 
54
 Ibid. 
55
 Some news articles on the case of Robert Bas, the journalist detained by the court: Het Parool, European Federation 
of Journalists, Teller Report, AD News, NL Times. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

34        
 
B. ENFORCEMENT OF THE FOREIGN BRIBERY OFFENCE 
B.1.  The Foreign Bribery Offence 
89. Relevant amendments to the Dutch Criminal Code entered into force in the Netherlands on 1 
January 2015. In its Phase 3 Written Follow-up report, the Netherlands indicated that the foreign bribery 
offence would be applied relying on existing domestic bribery case law. The Working Group acknowledged 
the amendments made to simplify and harmonise the foreign bribery offence in 2015, including the 
distinction between bribery to induce a violation of official duty and bribery to receive a benefit within the 
official’s duty (Recommendation 1(a)). Given this, at the time of the Netherlands’ Phase 3 Written Follow-
up report, the Working Group considered Recommendation 1(a) fully implemented. However, the WGB 
agreed during the Written Follow-up report that in line with standard procedure, a full evaluation of the 
amended law should be conducted in the next evaluation phase, given the Netherlands’ reliance on domestic 
57
bribery jurisprudence in the absence of case law on the foreign bribery offence.  
90. While Phase 4 presented an opportunity to explore the revised offence at the on-site visit, there 
continues to be no caselaw on the foreign bribery offence and so the evaluation team has no confirmation 
that the offence would hold up in court. Furthermore, while the OM’s Directive on Foreign Corruption was 
modified in 2013 and 2020, the modifications did not clarify issues with the foreign bribery offence that 
had been identified in previous evaluations of the Netherlands. The full text of the offence following the 
2015 reform reads as follows: 
Pursuant to Article 177 DCC (Active bribery of a public official): 
1. Punishment in the form of a prison sentence of no more than six years or a fine in the fifth category will 
be imposed on: 
1°. Whoever makes a gift or a promise to a public official, provides, or offers him a service with a view to 
getting him to carry out or fail to carry out a service; 
2°. Whoever makes a gift or a promise to a public official, provides, or offers him a service in response to 
or in connection with a service, past or present that the official carried out or failed to carry out. 
2. The same punishment will apply to anyone who commits an offence as described in the first paragraph, 
under 1°, against a person who has prospects of an appointment as a public official, if the appointment as 
a public official is followed. 
New Article 178 DCC (Active bribery of a judge) 
1. Whoever makes a gift or a promise to a judge or provides or offers him a service with a view to exerting 
influence on his decision in a case that is subject to his judgment will be punished with a prison sentence 
of at most nine years or a fine in the fifth category. 
2. If the gift or promise is made or the service is provided or offered with a view to obtaining a conviction 
in a case, the guilty person will be punished with a prison sentence of at the most twelve years or a fine in 
the fifth category. 
3. The offender may be disqualified from the practice of that profession if he commits any of the serious 
offences defined in this section in the practice of his profession.  
4. Disqualification from the rights listed in section 28(1)(1°), (2°) and (4°) may be imposed. 
                                                      
57
 Netherlands Phase 3 Written Follow-up report, p. 5.  
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

36        
 
political party. The interpretation of ‘gift’ complies largely with the requirements of Article 1 of the Anti-
Bribery Convention. For the interpretation of what would constitute a ‘service’, Dutch authorities refer to 
a case concerning domestic bribery where a Dutch public official accepted help from a subordinate to build 
his house, thereby making him vulnerable to potential inducements to act or refrain from acting in the 
62
performance of official duties. The evaluation team is reassured that the FP is willing to apply a broad 
interpretation of ‘gift’, ‘service’ and ‘advantage’ in foreign bribery cases. However, given that the foreign 
bribery offence remains to be tested before the Dutch courts, the Working Group should follow-up on the 
interpretation of these terms as case law develops.  
iii. Definition of a foreign public official  
94. Commentary 3 to the Convention requires countries to introduce “an ‘autonomous’ definition [of 
foreign public official] not requiring proof of the law of the particular official’s country”. Article 178a 
DCC defines foreign public officials as “persons in the public service of a foreign state or of an 
international (law) organisation”. This text was not altered by the 2015 amendments and is not defined 
further in the DCC or elsewhere under Dutch law. The scope of the definition is therefore left to the courts 
to interpret on a case-by-case basis. The definition is not autonomous and may involve in practice, a 
reference to other sources of evidence, such as evidence of the person’s employment status and duties in 
63
the foreign state. The lack of a definition for foreign public officials (and therefore its non-autonomous 
nature) was raised in the Phase 2 evaluation of the Netherlands and by other international monitoring bodies, 
64
including the Council of Europe’s Group of States against Corruption (GRECO). Government 
representatives at the on-site visit also indicated that the courts would refer to the nature of the tasks being 
performed (for example, by an SOE to determine whether they involved the provision of a ‘public service’).  
95. In 2008 GRECO recommended that the Netherlands analyse if there is a need to clarify which 
functions are covered by the notion of ‘public official’ in the DCC bribery offences (recommendation i). It 
found that Dutch Supreme Court jurisprudence was contradicted by “instances in which courts deemed the 
extent of the defendant’s knowledge as to his/her or another’s status as a public official a relevant factor 
in deciding on the guilt of the person concerned”. In its 2010 compliance report to GRECO, the Netherlands 
reported having commissioned a study by the Research and Documentation Centre (WODC) in the context 
of a debate on the implementation of public officials’ duty to report criminal offences, which confirmed 
GRECO’s concerns and found that the term ‘public official’ used in Dutch criminal law can lead to 
misunderstandings regarding the duty to report for private entities executing public functions. The 
Netherlands indicated that this would be rectified, by either amending the legislation, or adding a 
65
supplementary provision to the general administrative order pertaining to the relevant criminal provisions. 
Nothing has been done to address the problems with the definition of public official since the study was 
commissioned.  
                                                      
62
 Den Haag 20 December 2017, ECLI:NL:GHDHA:2017:3702, under 11.6.2.  
63
 In 2007, the Court of Appeal deemed the extent of the defendant’s knowledge as to his/her or another’s status as a 
public official a relevant factor in deciding on the guilt of the person concerned (cf. Court of Appeal Den Bosch, 12 
October 2007, LJN: BB5551 and LJN: BB5556). 
64
 Phase 2 Report (para. 189): “The Dutch Penal Code does not provide a comprehensive definition of the terms used 
in the foreign bribery offences to refer to a ‘foreign public official’. It was noted in the Phase 1 Report that the 
definitions of ‘public servants’ in the Penal Code are not directly applicable to foreign public servants, and so the 
definition of a foreign public official could not be considered autonomous” and NL GRECO report, 2008, para. 87. 
65
 Third Evaluation Round: Compliance Report on the Netherlands (GRECO RC-III (2010) 5E), 11 June 2010, p. 3. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

38        
 
Sint Maarten are entirely independent countries and have their own autonous criminal justice systems, 
whilst sharing the Supreme Court with the Netherlands and aligning criminal codes as much as possible. 
Curaçao adopted a new Criminal Code in November 2011; Aruba in February 2014 and Sint Maarten in 
2015. All three islands therefore now criminalise bribery of foreign public officials. The BES Islands are 
67
special municipalities of the Netherlands and are directly administered by the Dutch government.  
99. The BES islands have their own Criminal Code (legislated by Dutch Parliament), which sets out 
 
the criminal law applicable on those islands and its provisions closely resemble the Dutch Criminal Code.
68
 Specifically, foreign bribery is criminalised (articles 183 and 183a, 184 and 184a) and the amended 
sanctions in the DCC have been reflected, including the new maximum sentence of ten per cent of the 
previous year’s annual turnover for legal persons (article 53). As described below, the Netherlands has 
taken a more proactive approach to ensure enforcement of the foreign bribery offence in the Caribbean. 
Part of the approach has been to allocate resources for investigative personnel at the BES Islands.  
c. Enforcement of the Convention in the special municipalities in practice 
100. As described above, the BES Islands present certain risks of money laundering predicated on 
foreign bribery. However, to date, foreign bribery investigations have not been opened on the islands. The 
Dutch MJS mandates the BES Islands’ authorities to investigate and prosecute offences under the BES 
Islands Criminal Code. The MJS is not allowed to interfere with cases but it is responsible for the legal 
system on the islands. In practice, the BES Islands have four public prosecutors, the majority of which (70-
80%) come from the European part of the Netherlands and are posted to the Islands for a period of five 
years. The Korps Politie Caribisch Nederland (KPCN) has 100 local officers on the Islands. In order to 
identify, coordinate and identify investigative priorities with the Islands, additional funding of EUR 
303 000 has been made available for the Rijksrecherche for the period 2020-2022. This will be used to 
cover the costs of stationing two experienced and specially selected Rijksrecherche detectives on Bonaire 
(but operating in all three special municipalities) for a period of three years, starting August 2020.  
101. The core function of the Rijksrecherche detectives will be to perform and/or coordinate criminal 
investigations coming within their remit, under the authority of the chief public prosecutor on Bonaire. In 
addition, there are between six to eight FIOD officers and 20 officers from the Dutch National Police posted 
to Curaçao to manage a corruption and money laundering taskforce, which has jurisdiction over cases on 
BES Islands, Curaçao and Sint Maarten. The taskforce exists since 2016. Since the start, FIOD and police 
officers are participating in this taskforce. The taskforce investigated, among other things, several big 
corruption cases on Sint Maarten (Emerald, Larimar) which already led to convictions of politicians on Sint 
69
Maarten. The FIOD-ACC also conducted a three-day workshop in Curaçao on investigating corruption. 
The Netherlands’ Supreme Court has jurisdiction for the entire Kingdom, including the Caribbean part of 
the Kingdom (special municipalities of the BES Islands and the autonomous countries of Curacao, Aruba 
and St Maarten).  
Commentary 
The lead examiners welcome the more proactive approach taken by the Netherlands to promote 
enforcement of foreign bribery and other financial crimes in the BES Islands, such as stationing 
Rijksrecherche and FIOD officers on the Islands. They are, however, concerned by the lack of detection 
                                                      
67
 Evaluation of the new administrative structure of the BES Islands 2015. 
68
 BES Criminal Code. 
69
 For more details on the ‘Emerald-case’, please see: https://www.sxm-talks.com/the-daily-herald/court-hears-first-
suspects-in-so-called-emerald-case/ 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

40        
 
conflicting approaches to small facilitation payments do not change their zero tolerance approach to bribery, 
even though it sends a “wrong signal to companies” and “makes matter more difficult from a compliance 
perspective”.  
106. Accounting and audit professionals were aware of the text of the previous version of the Directive 
and indicated that if they detected a small facilitation payment they would report to the client and probably 
to the FIU. If they realised that the payment was being made systematically, they would then report it to 
the FP. This places a significant burden on the auditor in determining when a facilitation payment becomes 
a bribe and therefore raises the ongoing issue of formal and systematic awareness raising activities to 
discourage facilitation payments.  
Commentary 
Lead examiners welcome the recent revisions to the Directive on Foreign Corruption to avoid 
inconsistencies between the Directive and the foreign bribery offence.  
They recommend that the Netherlands, in the context of the recent amendment of the Directive, conduct 
more targeted efforts, including training and awareness raising activities, to encourage law enforcement 
officials, companies and professionals of the auditing and accounting profession to prevent, detect and 
report the use of facilitation payments.  
B.2.  Investigative and Prosecutorial Framework 
a. Overview of institutional changes in investigative and prosecutorial framework 
i. FIOD: A highly effective investigative agency dedicated to foreign bribery cases 
Institutional arrangements 
107. Since the Phase 3 evaluation, there has been a major restructure in the Dutch investigative 
framework with the FIOD, the criminal investigation service of the TCA having exclusive jurisdiction to 
conduct foreign and commercial bribery investigations. In Phase 3, foreign bribery investigations were 
handled by the Rijksrecherche which now focuses entirely on investigating bribery of Dutch public 
officials, along with cases of police criminal misconduct or negligence, use of firearms and serious use of 
force by the police. The FIOD and the Rijksrecherche are both criminal law enforcement agencies and 
therefore have the same range of investigative powers. Within the FIOD, the Anti-Corruption Centre is 
divided into three branches, responsible for: detection and acquisition; investigation and knowledge. It is 
staffed by FIOD employees and works to combat bribery and corruption, focusing mainly on bribery of 
foreign public officials and commercial bribery. FIOD-ACC also investigates related offences and conducts 
extensive training and awareness raising with other agencies and the private sector. In this respect, the 
FIOD has taken the initiative to publish information about investigations on its website with the aim of 
attracting greater public attention and raise awareness.  
108. FIOD has developed training videos for the MFA and Dutch embassies abroad, it has presented 
to Atradius Dutch State Business (Atradius DSB), the Netherlands’ export credit agency, and provided 
trainings to ODA officials and tax officials. FIOD-ACC can also liaise directly with other teams in the 
FIOD responsible for tax or money laundering investigations and share information accordingly. There was 
broad acknowledgement of the key role played by the FIOD in foreign bribery enforcement from all 
participants in the on-site visit. The recent update of the Directive on Foreign Corruption includes a 
reference to the role of the FIOD in the fight against foreign bribery in the Netherlands. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

42        
 
The transition of BOOM to the FP was based on the fact that it was primarily involved in financial crime 
cases, but this unit theoretically has jurisdiction for the entire country and all types of crimes. The BOOM 
is made up not only of prosecutors but also accountants, international advisors, and civil law experts, all of 
whom are specialised in proceeds of crime. The BOOM coordinates with the prosecutor responsible for a 
case in order to establish the confiscation strategy. Prosecutors at the on-site visit indicated that the Steering 
and Assessment Team decides whether to allocate a team from the BOOM to a case, and also its 
composition within the number of experts available, when designing a plan for an investigation. 
113. The OM’s appeals department handles appeals of FP cases, it is also responsible for appeals 
against decisions to terminate proceedings under art. 12 CPC (see below, Non-Trial Resolutions), pursuant 
to which there is judicial review by the Court of Appeal of large settlements or dismissals. In 2020, the 
appeals department appointed a senior prosecutor in appeal cases as a ‘national specialist anti-corruption in 
appeal’ (NSAP in appeal), who is –like the NCPC of the FP—responsible for coordinating and carrying out 
foreign bribery prosecutions. This NSAP in appeal is also responsible for anti-corruption. In addition, the 
appeals department has a Special Cases Team of mainly senior prosecutors who are, in principle, all capable 
of handling cases of foreign bribery and confiscation.  
Resources and training 
114. In Phase 3, the OM reported it had 35 prosecutors working on fraud and corruption cases. 
However, the team of the NCPC was only staffed with one prosecutor and a legal assistant and participants 
at the on-site voiced their concerns that insufficient resources could be resulting in the low levels of 
enforcement registered at that time. The Working Group thus recommended that the Netherlands provide 
adequate resources to Dutch law enforcement authorities to effectively examine, investigate and prosecute 
all suspicions of foreign bribery. This recommendation was deemed fully implemented during the Phase 3 
Written Follow-up. 
115. At the time of the on-site visit, the FP’s Anti-Corruption Team was made up of three prosecutors, 
two stationed in the Rotterdam and one in the Amsterdam office, who are dedicated to foreign and 
commercial bribery cases, although they can be allocated to other cases based on expertise or capacity 
needs. However, the evaluation team was made aware that both the NCPC and a key prosecutor leading 
foreign bribery prosecutions in the Anti-Corruption Team had assumed different roles since then. The 
prosecutor has already been replaced, but it is currently unclear when the NCPC will be replaced. There is 
also a ‘flexible shell’ made up of currently eight prosecutors who are part of the Team but who are not 
exclusively allocated to corruption cases and also handle other fraud cases. The Netherlands reports that 
prosecutors outside the Anti-Corruption Team can also be assigned to corruption cases, with all units of the 
FP being able, in principle, to investigate cases of this kind, provided they have the requisite capacity and 
competence. 
116. Human resources dedicated to foreign bribery prosecutions have somewhat increased since 
Phase 3. At the same time, the Netherlands has seen a significant increase in its foreign bribery caseload 
(from 4 ongoing investigations in Phase 3 to 24 at the present time): in Phase 3 the OM was only staffed 
with the NCPC for foreign bribery. Eight years later, in addition to the NCPC, there are three prosecutors 
working exclusively on foreign and commercial bribery cases and eight prosecutors who spend part of their 
time working on these cases. This allocation of human resources seems minimal compared to other WGB 
74
countries with similar-sized economies and foreign bribery risks and sometimes with smaller caseloads. 
The FP’s annual budget for 2019 was close to EUR 40 million, which includes a share of the additional 
EUR 20 million dedicated to improve and intensify efforts to combat corruption and money laundering. 
                                                      
74
 See also: Norway Phase 4 Report, para. 74, and Australia Phase 4 Report, para. 125. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

44        
 
Commentary 
The lead examiners commend the Netherlands for the reorganisation of its investigative and 
prosecutorial agencies and, in particular, for the creation of specialised teams focusing on bribery within 
both the FIOD and the FP. They welcome the impressive efforts deployed by the staff in those units, 
with their work reflected in the exponential increase in the number of foreign bribery investigations 
since 2016. The lead examiners also note with satisfaction that cooperation between both agencies 
begins at early stages of the investigation process.  
Nevertheless, the lead examiners remain concerned about the available resources, particularly the 
number of staff allocated to corruption cases in the FP, which several private sector representatives 
present at the on-site visit considered insufficient. The Working Group will therefore follow-up on the 
adequacy of human and financial resources to investigate and prosecute foreign bribery.  
c. Enforcement Policy 
121. Prosecutions in the Netherlands are conducted according to the principle of prosecutorial 
discretion (opportuniteitsbeginsel) which has been formalised under article 167 DCPC. Prosecutors have 
discretion to dismiss a case, to settle a case out of court or to choose for which offences a suspect shall be 
prosecuted. This discretion is mitigated by a set of general guidelines issued by the Board of Prosecutors 
General that bind the actions of prosecutors and set the OM’s internal policy: Instructions and Directives. 
The MJS is always consulted regarding the issuance of new Directives. As was already mentioned, 
Instructions are internal guidelines whereas Directives are public, have external legal effect and can form 
the basis of legal claims in criminal proceedings. 
i. The Foreign Corruption Directive 
122. The Directive on the Investigation and Prosecution of Corruption of Public Officials Abroad 
(Foreign Corruption Directive) raised several concerns from the Working Group during the Phase 2 and 
Phase 3 evaluations regarding compliance with Article 5 of the Convention, leading to its amendment. At 
the time of Phase 3, a revision of this Directive was underway and the Working Group recommended that 
the Netherlands proceed with its adoption and implementation in a way that would ensure that its 
interpretation is not contrary to Article 5 of the Convention (Recommendation 3(d)). This reform entered 
into force on 1 January 2013 and the Working Group considered the recommendation fully implemented. 
An additional reform was made on October 2020 addressing the issue of small facilitation payments and 
adding guidance on issues such as disgorgement and the usage of third parties in foreign bribery schemes.  
123. The Foreign Corruption Directive provides the scope for the criminalisation of foreign bribery in 
75
the Netherlands and “describes the decision-making procedure for the selection of cases”. The Directive 
addresses all aspects of a foreign bribery case, including investigation and prosecution (including 
responsible authorities), disgorgement, among others. .  
124. The following factors laid out in the Foreign Corruption Directive are to be taken into account by 
76
prosecutors in order to determine the priority in prosecuting foreign bribery cases: 
 Scale of the bribe, in absolute or relative terms; 
                                                      
75
 Foreign Corruption Directive, see Annex 2 to Phase 3 Written Follow-up Report p. 35. 
76
 Ibid, p. 41. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

46        
 
the Directive. The revised Directive is effective immediately but does not apply to non-trial resolutions that 
had already been submitted for approval to the Minister of Justice and Security. Dutch authorities have 
confirmed that it could apply to foreign bribery investigations that are already underway. 
128.  It is relevant to mention that there are currently no sentencing guidelines for prosecutors in 
relation to the foreign bribery offence and, therefore, there is no specific guidance regarding the amounts 
of the fines to be imposed in the context of non-trial resolutions. The revised Directive does not include 
guidelines on sanctions to be imposed in the context of non-trial resolutions. 
iii. Holding natural persons and gatekeepers accountable for their roles in foreign bribery 
cases 
129. Civil society representatives at the on-site visit considered the enforcement policy with respect to 
natural persons very unsatisfactory, noting that only one natural person has been held liable in connection 
with a foreign bribery (Ballast Nedam case) and in other cases there were no investigations or prosecutions 
of natural persons. They considered that the OM had not been successful in holding individuals liable and 
referred also to the acquittals of members of corporate management in domestic bribery cases (namely, 
78
Dutch Railways). They considered that the enforcement focus was firmly on companies, instead of 
individuals. The revised Directive on Large Transactions does not bring clarity to the official approach, 
prescribing in the introduction that “large transactions are generally applied only in relation to legal 
persons” then later in its general principles noting that “a number of factors are relevant to the question of 
whether an offending natural or legal person is eligible for a transaction” [emphasis added].  
130. Representatives from companies at the on-site visit expressed their views that nowadays, a 
resolution would only be offered to a company if it agreed to cooperate with the authorities in bringing 
about the prosecution of the natural persons involved. Lawyers at the on-site stated that the OM has 
announced that it would be taking a similar approach to the United States along the lines of the Yates 
79
memorandum in respect to white-collar crime cases. According to the prosecutors, companies that 
acknowledge the facts (not an admission of guilt) may be offered a non-trial resolution whereas individuals 
will in most instances be formally prosecuted. With the acknowledgement of facts cooperation often goes 
hand in hand and will be taken into account. Prosecutors indicated that one of the reasons they prefer taking 
natural persons to trial was the greater array of penalties available, such as disqualification from 
professional activities  
131. Prosecutors at the on-site indicated that, in theory, members of company boards and executives 
could be held liable pursuant to the framework set out under article 51 DCC (see also below, Liability of 
Legal Persons). They indicated that, in practice, a formal investigation into the natural persons is conducted 
in parallel to investigations against a company. However, the termination of investigations into executives 
in the Ballast Nedam and the Vimpelcom cases suggests that Dutch law enforcement authorities are 
experiencing difficulties in establishing liability for natural persons. Similarly, the two only natural persons 
                                                      
78
 For more background on the case, see State-Owned Enterprises and Corruption: What are the risks and what can 
be done? (OECD, 2018), p. 36.  
79
 Yates Memorandum is the name commonly given to a document issued in September 2015 by then US DOJ Deputy 
Attorney General Sally Yates entitled “Individual Accountability for Corporate Wrongdoing”. As its title suggests, 
the document served to re-state the DOJ’s commitment to holding individuals, and particularly executives, responsible 
for corporate misconduct. This came following public backlash over the failure of the DOJ to prosecute any senior 
officials in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis. One of the pillars of the memorandum regarding the DOJ’s 
enforcement policy is that companies will only be eligible for credit for cooperation with the DOJ if they provide all 
relevant facts about the individuals involved in the offences under investigation. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

48        
 
collaboration in confiscation matters by combining criminal law interventions with fiscal and administrative 
law interventions. The MJS and the Ministry of Finance monitor annually the progress of national key 
performance indicators. From 2020 onwards, the seizure results for each (regional) prosecutor’s office and 
police region will be reported, as well as the results of national criminal law confiscation. The Dutch 
Parliament also recently adopted a motion on the seizure of criminal assets calling on the MJS to take 
80
control of the confiscation chain to ensure that more criminal assets are confiscated. This comes as part 
of a general plan which includes a new Multidisciplinary Intervention Team established in April 2020 with 
81
a focus on exposing the illegal revenue models of criminal structures. The Netherlands indicates that 
concrete plans are currently being developed. 
136. The Directive on Confiscation provides prosecutors with the different options legally available to 
confiscate proceeds of crime. All involved agencies determine the best legal option for confiscation and 
prosecutors attempt to prevent dissipation of assets as early on in the case as possible. The OM’s 
confiscation policy prioritises victim compensation over payments to the state. Offering a resolution out of 
court which includes an amount of more than EUR 5 000 must be reported to the TCA. The Directive also 
sets out the principles for financial investigations into assets and money flows and for confiscation itself, 
by determining, for example, that no confiscation claim shall be filed where the person concerned has no 
financial means.  
v. Impact of COVID-19 on foreign bribery enforcement 
137. Since the on-site visit, the Coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has sparked unprecedented 
challenges for law enforcement agencies around the globe and generated foreign bribery risks associated 
with action taken to mitigate the health and economic crisis. The Netherlands indicated that foreign bribery 
investigations and prosecutions have been particularly affected, due to the inability to travel to the executing 
country to help obtain information requested through international cooperation. There is also a prioritisation 
of cases focusing on misuse of COVID-19 response and recovery funds in the Netherlands and heightened 
risks of money laundering.  
138. The Temporary Act COVID-19 Justice and Security was enacted on 24 April 2020. It provides 
for the use of (group) telephony in criminal cases for the hearing, interrogation or questioning of persons 
instead of video conferencing in which a direct audio and video link is established (article 27); and 
temporary replacement of physical hearings in criminal proceedings with an oral hearing by (group) 
telephony (article 28). Some investigations and prosecutions were or are delayed due to the COVID-19 
crisis and only urgent searches are being conducted, although prosecutors report that new cases have been 
opened since the start of the crisis. On the other hand, preliminary investigations, gathering and assessing 
information that can lead to new cases, continues.  
139. The courts were closed between March and May 2020 and have been dealing with priority cases 
relating to the deprivation of liberty, juvenile (criminal) cases and family law matters. Judges, prosecutors 
and lawyers endeavour to advance individual cases going by conducting video interviews or exchanging 
positions in writing instead of oral exchanges in court. The FP established a working group to analyse the 
impact of COVID-19 on investigations and prosecutions, and is sharing solutions and best practices with 
other agencies, including the FIOD.  
                                                      
80
 Netherlands Parliamentary Monitor, Motion on the seizure of criminal assets, 16 June 2020 (in Dutch). 
81
 Netherlands Government Website, About 400 MIT specialists to join the fight against subversive crime, 
16 June 2020. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

50        
 
for criminal investigation. Two of these cases involve bribery of foreign public officials. The cases were 
selected for various reasons including involvement of a range of sectors and an assessment of the potential 
impact of the case and its potential to trigger change. However, the number of cases selected for 
investigation represents only 10% of a large body of possible cases, suggesting that there were other 
potential cases that were not investigated.  
b. Establishing jurisdiction  
144. The framework for exercising territorial, nationality or other forms of extraterritorial jurisdiction 
over the foreign bribery offence has not changed since Phase 3, although article numbering has changed 
following unrelated reforms. Articles 2-8d DCC and the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (International 
Obligations) Decree govern the exercise of jurisdiction by law enforcement authorities in the Netherlands. 
Jurisdiction is based on the territoriality principle, that is, the Netherlands has jurisdiction if the offence is 
wholly or partly committed in its territory. As noted below (Liability of Legal Persons), the legal position 
on whether active or passive nationality is required to exercise jurisdiction over companies in the 
Netherlands is evolving.  
145. Extraterritorial jurisdiction is invoked where an offence takes place outside the Netherlands, but 
the circumstances are such that Dutch criminal law may still be applied by the Dutch criminal courts, 
because the offence was committed by a Dutch national. Article 7 DCC requires dual criminality to exercise 
extraterritorial jurisdiction over Dutch nationals (natural or legal persons) for bribery offences. Prosecutors 
confirmed during the on-site visit that in foreign bribery cases it would be sufficient for the foreign country 
to criminalise domestic/passive bribery, making it a flexible approach on ‘equivalent conduct offences’. 
Prosecutors further confirmed that the dual criminality requirement does not extend to corporate liability, 
and therefore jurisdiction could be established over a company for foreign bribery if the foreign jurisdiction 
did not provide for corporate liability, or had an administrative form of liability.  
Commentary 
The lead examiners consider that the Netherlands’ framework for exercising jurisdiction in foreign 
bribery cases is consistent with the standards in the Convention. Nevertheless, they recommend that that 
Working Group follow up on the application of the dual criminality requirement for exercising 
extraterritorial jurisdiction, to ensure that it does not provide an impediment in foreign bribery cases. 
c. Limitation Periods 
i. Statute of limitations 
146. Article 70 DCC establishes the statutory limitation period for prosecuting an offence, which varies 
according to the maximum penalty for the corresponding offence. The statute of limitation applicable to 
the foreign bribery offences therefore varies between 12 years (bribery of public officials) and 20 years 
(bribery of judges to obtain a criminal conviction). The period of the statute begins to run on the day 
following the day on which the offence is committed. Under article 72(1) DCC, ‘any act of prosecution’ 
interrupts the period of limitation which starts anew. The defendant’s knowledge of this ‘act of prosecution’ 
is not necessary and the consequence is automatic. The right to prosecute a crime expires once the original 
period of limitation has expired twice. This means that, as long as there is a ‘prosecution act’ within the 
original 12 years of the limitation period, the actual period of limitation for the foreign bribery offence 
under article 177 DCC is 24 years.  
147. According to the Netherlands, no case of foreign bribery has been terminated due to the expiration 
of the statute of limitations, although two cases were not formally investigated because the facts were time-
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

52        
 
has been amended several times since Phase 3 to provide for further investigative tools, such as systemic 
observation (article 126g DCPC); recording communications with a technical device (article 126m DCPC); 
searching in a computer system (article 126nba DCPC); and requisitioning security camera images by 
investigating officers – a tool previously only available to prosecutors (article 126nda DCPC). In addition, 
article 126m DCPC was amended in 2017 to allow a wiretaps to be authorised by name (rather than by 
number). This avoids the need to apply for a new authorisation each time a suspect uses a different phone. 
The examining magistrate is responsible for deciding whether a tap should be authorised by name or 
number. FIOD investigators at the on-site visit indicated that the prosecutor who is handling the case must 
seek approvals for certain special investigative techniques. In terms of investigation plans, where there are 
legal or tactical issues, the NCPC helps direct cases. Investigators and prosecutors working on the case also 
organise ‘reflection groups’ every few months to coordinate and develop joint plans. 
150. In foreign bribery cases, to date, FIOD-ACC has used mostly the following techniques: 
examination of hard copy books and records; analysis of digital data using Forensic Toolkit (FTK) to search 
through records, emails and other forms of digital information (such as the minutes of board meetings); 
search and seizure; scrutiny of internal investigation information; and interviewing witnesses and suspects, 
wiretapping and the interception of communications. The FIOD has also used external accountants to assist 
with its investigations. FIOD investigators at the on-site visit underlined the usefulness of FIOD being 
institutionally housed within the TCA for access to tax information. This means that FIOD investigators 
can enter TCA systems to access tax information (including information on foreign bank accounts held by 
Dutch nationals disclosed under the Automatic Exchange of Information (AEOI) framework) and open 
investigations of their own accord. They indicated that guidance and procedures on self-reporting would be 
helpful as currently companies self-report to both prosecutors and FIOD-ACC investigators. In the context 
of settlement procedures resulting from self-reports, the role of the FIOD is to investigate and substantiate 
financial information for the purposes of calculating fines and confiscation for use by prosecutors.  
ii. The use of ‘self-investigations’ 
151. In certain fraud and corruption cases in the past, defendant companies instructed a law or 
consultancy firm to conduct a ‘self-investigation’ (zelfonderzoek) in parallel to the FIOD’s criminal 
investigation. The evaluation team only became aware of this practice during the preparation of the report 
due to the public debate described below.  
152. Dutch prosecutors indicate that the use of ‘self-investigations’ is determined on a case-by-case 
basis and can occur either prior to a self-report (i.e. at the company’s own initiation); following a dawn 
raid; or in parallel to an ongoing criminal investigation by the FIOD-ACC. There have been cases in which 
the OM agreed the parameters of the investigation in advance with the defendant company, which in turn 
committed to sharing the findings with the FP undergoing further verification and investigation by the 
FIOD-ACC. The OM reports that, to date, self-investigations have been used in seven corruption-related 
cases and the results shared with FIOD and the OM. It is unknown how many of these related to foreign 
bribery.  
153. In June 2019 the Minister of Justice and Security responded to Parliamentary questions about the 
use of self-investigations by the OM and FIOD, noting that the practice is subject to preconditions and 
review of the information and reduced demands on FIOD and FP resources and could result in more 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

54        
 
the legislation enters into force on 27 September 2020. Legal entities created after that date have to register 
their beneficial owners straight away. Legal entities that fail to register or update their UBO within the legal 
timeframe will be subject to administrative or criminal sanctions. Legal entities incorporated in the BES 
islands will not have to submit their UBO information to a central register since they are not subject to EU 
legislation. 
156. The general public will be able to access the information in the register instantly through the 
internet by paying a minor fee. Dutch competent authorities will also have instant access through direct 
communication channels with the Chamber of Commerce. Law enforcement authorities will therefore be 
entitled to access and use the information on the UBO registry in the context of a criminal investigation, 
including into foreign bribery. In addition to the information that is available to the general public, 
competent authorities of other States (both EU Member States and non-EU Member States) will be able to 
access the publicly available UBO information themselves directly in the UBO registry and to request from 
the Dutch competent authorities information on beneficial owners that is only available to those 
92
authorities. The UBO registers of the EU member states will be linked in the near future to further 
streamline the sharing of UBO information.  
157. Civil society representatives at the on-site visit considered that the proposal for an UBO registry 
was limited, in that access required payment of a fee. Investigators were not convinced it would bring 
substantial advantages to foreign bribery investigations given that in most cases, they need to determine the 
UBO of foreign, rather than Dutch, incorporated companies.  
Commentary 
The lead examiners congratulate the Netherlands on the recent introduction of a register of ultimate 
beneficial ownership for companies and other legal entities incorporated in the Netherlands. They hope 
that this will help facilitate greater detection and enforcement of the foreign bribery offence. They 
therefore recommend that the Working Group follow up on the implementation of the UBO register in 
the Netherlands, including in the BES Islands, to ensure that it records adequate, accurate and current 
beneficial ownership information on companies incorporated in their jurisdictions, and provides 
sufficient access by law enforcement authorities in foreign bribery cases. 
iv. Processes for assessing legal privilege claims cause major delays in foreign bribery law 
enforcement actions 
158. The protection of client-attorney communications in the Netherlands is guaranteed in article 
11a(1) and (2) of the Counsel Act, which provides that a lawyer must maintain confidentiality with regard 
to all information that is entrusted to the lawyer in his/her professional capacity. This applies regardless of 
the client. Rule 3 of the Rules of Professional Conduct 2018 establishes that a lawyer is obliged to maintain 
confidentiality with regard to all information about clients and cases. Consideration, however, has to be 
given to whether the lawyer was entrusted with this information by virtue of practising in the legal 
profession. Violation of legal privilege gives rise to disciplinary sanctions under article 46 of the Counsel 
Act and criminal sanctions under article 272 DCC.  
159. The DCPC establishes the parameters for claims of legal privilege in criminal proceedings. Article 
218 provides a lawyer the right to refrain from giving evidence and from answering questions in relation to 
                                                      
92
 In accordance with the amended Fourth EU Anti-Money Laundering Directive, be publicly available: name, month 
and year of birth, nationality, country of residence and birth, foreign tax identification number, nature of the beneficial 
interest held and extent of the beneficial interest held. The following information will be available only to competent 
authorities: address, full date of birth, country and place of birth, citizen service number/tax identification number, 
copy of identification documents and copy of documents detailing the nature and extent of the beneficial interest held. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

56        
 
162. The issue of protracted processes for assessing legal privilege claims is not new, however. In 
2014, the legislation was amended to introduce a shorter time period (90 days for the Supreme Court; 30 
days for lower courts; arts. 552a(8) and 552d(3) DCPC) for assessing privilege claims to ensure that they 
96
did not hinder investigations. However, the reforms did not provide for consequences for failure to meet 
the reduced timeframes and, in reality, the new timeframes are not being met due to the large amounts of 
data that need to be assessed to determine privilege. The Netherlands indicated that the WODC is 
conducting a review of the reason for these time limits not being met and the “improper use and abuse of 
97
the right of non-disclosure to delay and complicate criminal investigations”. The report will be published 
and shared with Parliament by the end of 2020. Law enforcement officials at the on-site visit indicated that 
they agreed in principle with the need for a strong framework for legal privilege, but that the practical 
implications for upholding it meant delays of between 2-3 years in investigations. Law enforcement 
authorities are particularly concerned about the implications of these delays for the ‘reasonable time’ test 
applied by the courts and the statutory limitation period (see above, Limitation Periods). In particular, they 
referred to the inordinate amount of time required to sift through huge amounts of data seized on servers 
and the inadequacy of investigative judges’ resources and technological tools and expertise to conduct this 
analysis. Investigators and prosecutors at the on-site visit indicated that blanket privilege claims over data 
seized in the context of foreign bribery investigations were the principle obstacle to effective enforcement. 
In the short term, the Dutch authorities are exploring whether artificial intelligence and other data analytics 
could be used to filter out privileged material from large electronic databases. There are concerns, however, 
at the margin for human error in the parameters that would need to be defined in such an exercise.  
163. FIOD investigators also referred to use of privilege that hinders the investigations, referring to a 
foreign bribery case where the company wanted to disclose information to the authorities but the external 
lawyer asserted privilege over the information. In other cases, lawyers have asserted privilege over 
information seized from third parties or even over witnesses, preventing from testifying. The FP is able, 
however, to use information provided from foreign authorities in response to MLA requests that contains 
information in respect to which privilege was waived in the other jurisdiction.  
164. In a statement dated June 2019 OM and FIOD indicated they were considering proposals to 
improve procedures applying to the right of non-disclosure, because of delays in criminal investigations 
due to such blanket privilege claims and their use as a ‘procedural weapon’. The OM claimed that if no 
changes were made to the legal framework for privilege, it would be unable to pursue large cases against 
98
international companies. Officials from the MJS indicated that the issue of privilege would be addressed 
in the broader context of a major reform to modernise the DCPC, which is conducted in close consultation 
with the concerned parties. However, they also indicated that due to the scale of this reform, it is unlikely 
to be enacted in the near future. There are also initiatives to look into technical solutions to filter out more 
effectively the privileged information. The judgement of the Supreme Court described above could help 
these developments in the near future and could lead to greater efficiency. The Dutch Bar Association 
amended the Code of Conduct (gedragsregels) in 2018, to clarify which information falls within the scope 
of lawyer-client privilege, notably information ‘that is entrusted to him/her in his/her capacity as a lawyer’. 
The Code specifically warns against copying a lawyer on email correspondence or including a lawyer in a 
conversation for the sole purpose of claiming privilege over the communications. It also indicates that 
                                                      
96
 FATF Netherlands MER 2014, p. 26. 
97
 See WODC website (in Dutch): www.wodc.nl/onderzoeksdatabase/2981-verschoningsrecht.aspx.   
98
 OM Website, “The Public Prosecution Service and FIOD want to make procedures for non-disclosure rights more 
effective and clearer”, 7 June 2019 (in Dutch).  
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

58        
 
b. Independence  
i. The legal framework for Ministerial instructions in specific cases and previously in 
non-trial resolutions 
169. Article 5 of the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention prohibits “considerations of national economic 
interest”, the “relations with another State”, or the identity of the persons involved from influencing the 
investigation and prosecution of foreign bribery. As noted above (Investigative and Prosecutorial 
Framework), the Judiciary Organisation Act provides that the Minister of Justice and Security may issue 
general and specific instructions on the tasks and competence of the OM (article 127). In relation to the 
investigation or prosecution of criminal offences in specific cases, the Minister must give the Board of 
Prosecutors General written, reasoned notice of the proposed instruction. The Minister may make oral 
instructions only because time is of the essence and the instruction must subsequently be recorded in writing 
within one week. If the Minister issues an instruction to discontinue an investigation or prosecution, the 
Minister must give notice of the instruction and the views of the Board to both Houses of Parliament (article 
128). In the responses to the Phase 4 questionnaire, the Dutch authorities reported, to date, there have not 
been any ministerial instructions relating to foreign bribery cases.  
170. As outlined above (Enforcement Policy) and below, non-trial resolutions in foreign bribery cases 
are largely governed by the Directive on Large Transactions. The Directive was revised and reissued and 
is effective from 4 September 2020. The revised Directive establishes a Review Committee to review and 
approve proposed non-trial resolutions, replacing the previous requirement for approval of the Minister of 
Justice and Security. However, in theory and even though the Directive is now silent on the role of the 
Minister of Justice and Security in non-trial resolutions, in accordance with articles 127-129 of the Judiciary 
(Organisation) Act, the Minister may nevertheless issue an instruction to take the case to trial. Furthermore, 
pursuant to article 129 of the Judiciary (Organisation) Act, the Board of Procurators General is required by 
law to provide the Minister ‘with the information he needs’ and OM prosecutors must, in turn provide the 
Board with information needed by the Board. The Dutch authorities indicate that the Directive has been 
revised and reissued as an interim measure in the context of broader legal reforms to the DCC and the Dutch 
non-trial resolution regime, which propose to introduce, inter alia, judicial oversight. These reforms are 
described below (Non-Trial Resolutions). 
ii. Political and hierarchical influence in foreign bribery case management 
171. Prosecutorial independence considers both ‘internal’ and ‘external’ perspectives: the 
independence of the prosecution as an institution and the independence of individual prosecutors. The 
procedure set out previously in the Directive on High and Special Transactions raised concerns with respect 
to both internal and external independence. Discussions with prosecutors and defence lawyers at the on-
site visit revealed that, in practice, prosecutors offered a non-trial resolution to defendant companies on the 
proviso that the resolution was subject to final approval both from the Board of Prosecutors and the Minister 
of Justice and Security. This Directive was revised and reissued on 4 September 2020 to remove the 
requirement for ministerial approval (see below). 
172. The ongoing foreign bribery case involving Royal Dutch Shell raises serious concerns about the 
involvement of the Minister of Justice and Security in decisions to prosecute or settle foreign bribery cases 
that go beyond what is set out in the Judiciary (Organisation) Act or the previous Directive on High and 
Special Transactions. In response to a Freedom of Information request by a lawyer acting on behalf of four 
civil society organisations, the Minister of Justice and Security released documents on 27 January 2020 
containing heavily redacted email and WhatsApp exchanges about the criminal investigation of Shell’s 
acquisition of the OPL 245 oil and gas field in Nigeria. The documents reveal repeated interactions and in-
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

60        
 
for Ministerial approval of High and Special Transactions, and replace it with judicial oversight. There was 
unanimity among participants in the on-site visit that the move to judicial oversight would bring more 
transparency, predictability and accountability to the Dutch legislative framework for non-trial resolutions. 
In the interim, the Directive on Large Transactions has been revised and reissued, establishing a Review 
Committee to provide advice to the Board of Prosecutors General on proposed non-trial resolutions, thereby 
removing the requirement for ministerial approval. The revised Directive and proposed legislative reforms 
are discussed below (Non-Trial Resolutions). 
Commentary:  
The evaluation team was seriously concerned that the Directive on High and Special Transactions 
mandated involvement of the Minister of Justice and Security in the resolution of foreign bribery cases 
(and indeed required ministerial approval of non-trial resolutions) which could involve considerations 
prohibited in Article 5 of the Convention. The recent revision of the Directive to replace the requirement 
for ministerial approval with advice by a Review Committee for Large Transactions (pending legal 
reforms to introduce judicial oversight) allays these concerns. However, the role, function and status of 
the Review Committee, its members and its advice need to be clarified, as does the timeframe for the 
broader legal reforms to the Dutch non-trial resolutions regime.  
The ability of the Minister of Justice and Security to request information from the OM in specific cases, 
and the exercise of these powers in a foreign bribery case, merit follow-up. Concrete examples of direct 
political or hierarchical involvement in foreign bribery case management and reporting raise further 
concerns. In light of the disclosure of confidential information relating to ongoing criminal proceedings 
by a Dutch ambassador and the recent decision of the Court of The Hague on the wrongful dismissal of 
the whistleblower who reported the incident, the lead examiners have serious Article 5 concerns. 
Therefore, they recommend that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs conduct systematic training among 
Dutch officials posted abroad on its protected reporting framework, the standards set out in the 
Convention, including Article 5, and the confidential nature of criminal investigations. 
c. Non-Trial Resolutions  
176. In Phase 3, the Working Group decided to follow up on the use of out-of-court settlements in 
foreign bribery cases (Follow-up Issue 11(b). At the time of the Phase 3 Written Follow-Up Report, two 
foreign bribery cases had been concluded by non-trial resolution (SBM Offshore and Ballast Nedam). 
Since then,  an additional two resolutions have been reached with companies in relation to the same foreign 
bribery scheme (Vimpelcom and Teliasonera).  
i. Legal Framework for Non-Trial Resolutions 
177. There are two legal frameworks for non-trial resolutions under Dutch law: article 74 DCC 
(‘transaction’; transactie) and article 257a DCPC (‘penalty order’; strafbeschikking), which was introduced 
in 2008. Both frameworks apply to offences carrying a maximum penalty of not more than six years’ 
imprisonment (which includes the foreign bribery offence). The 2008 Public Prosecutor Settlement Act 
(Wet OM-Afdoening) introduced the penalty order to gradually replace non-trial resolutions under article 
74 DCC. The January 2019 Directive on Penalty Orders (2018A010) notes that the aim of introducing the 
penalty order was to scale back the use of transactions under article 74 DCC. The Directive indicates, 
however, that in exceptional cases such as the —so-called ‘Large and Special Transactions’—prosecutors 
can still use resolutions under article 74 DCC as a mode of disposal. 
178. Penalty orders imposed by the public prosecutor under article 257a DCPC involve an act of 
prosecution, which means that, among other things, the payment of a possible fine can be enforced and the 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

62        
 
iii. Oversight  
182. The Ballast Nedam case (2012) illustrates how the previous framework for oversight and 
approval of non-trial resolutions could jeopardise the administration of justice in foreign bribery cases. In 
this case, the company’s auditors (three KPMG accountants) were separately investigated for money 
laundering and forgery offences in connection with issuing an unqualified audit report and failing to report 
fraud in the context of the bribery of public officials from Saudi Arabia and Suriname. Following 
discussions in late 2013, the auditors agreed to a non-trial resolution with the OM and deposited the agreed 
upon amount in the State Advocate’s account, following a specific request by the OM via email dated 20 
December 2013, which also noted “[I]f the state does not authorise the resolution penalty, the amount will 
108
of course be refunded to your client.” The non-trial resolution offer was subsequently retracted and the 
payment refunded, following a message from the OM on 23 December indicating that “no authorisation 
109
had been received from ‘up the line’”. The three defendants were then prosecuted. The Midden-
Nederland District Court, in a judgement on 19 April 2018, held the case was inadmissible. In its decision, 
the court found, inter alia, that “in view of the entire course of events during this settlement process, the 
110
Public Prosecution Service acted improperly towards the suspect”. The OM has appealed the decision 
and judgment is still pending. 
183. Part 5 of the revised Directive instructs prosecutors to submit their intention to offer a large 
settlement to the chief public prosecutor of the relevant prosecutors office (in foreign bribery cases, this 
would be the head of the FP). This creates a requirement for approval at an earlier stage in the process than 
the previous Directive, which required prosecutors to submit the proposed resolution “at a time when the 
resolution is not yet irreversible”. This should hopefully avoid repeating the scenario described above, such 
as in the case against the KPMG auditors, where the settlement offer was withdrawn after the amount of 
the agreed penalties had been deposited.  
184. It is unclear to what extent there was public consultation in developing this new framework for 
approving non-trial resolutions. As it was not public at the time of the on-site visit, the evaluation team did 
not have the opportunity to obtain perspectives from various stakeholders. According to the revised 
Directive, once the chief public prosecutor of the relevant OM office approves the settlement, the 
transaction proposal is submitted to the Board of Prosecutors General for approval. The Board then requests 
the advice of the Review Committee for Large Transactions. The Review Committee is made up of three 
members appointed by the Board from candidates who must be either a former lawyer, former judge, 
professor of criminal law and procedure, or former public prosecutors. The Board of Prosecutors General 
appoints the Committee members although the criteria and term of the appointment are not defined in the 
Directive or elsewhere, nor is the basis for dismissing a member of the Committee. There is no reference 
to what would constitute a conflict of interest, nor is there a procedure to follow in case such a conflict 
arises. The members of the Committee had been appointed but not been publicly announced at the time of 
drafting this report. In the absence of a clearer, publicly available framework for the appointment and tenure 
of Committee members, the process for assessing non-trial resolutions and the legal status of the 
Committee’s advice, the evaluation team considers that there are risks of conflicts of interest and 
consideration of factors prohibited by Article 5 of the Convention. 
185.  In terms of the role of the Committee in proposed non-trial resolutions, the Board submits to the 
Committee a substantiated transaction proposal; statement of facts including the applicable criminal 
                                                      
108
 Judgment of the Midden-Nederland District Court, 19 April 2018 (ECLI:NL:RBME:2018:1616). 
109
 Ibid. 
110
 Ibid. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

64        
 
v. Transparency 
188. In terms of transparency, the revised Directive provides that, in principle, a press release will be 
published and should include the amount of the transaction and a statement of facts setting out the 
investigation findings, the criminal conduct that is the subject of the resolution and applicable criminal 
offences and the role of the defendant. According to the revised Directive, this holds the OM publicly 
accountable for the handling and settlement of the case and compensates for the lack of publicity following 
a public hearing and court decision and will have a preventive effect. Settlements in the Ballast Nedam, 
SBM Offshore, Teliasonera and Vimpelcom cases were all made public by a press release on the OM’s 
111
website. The ING case in 2018 was the first case where a full statement of facts and the settlement 
112
agreement were both published. Civil society representatives at the on-site visit noted the increasing 
transparency of information on non-trial resolutions. However, non-trial resolutions with natural persons in 
another foreign bribery case were not made public. Non-trial resolutions that fall outside the scope of ‘Large 
Transactions’, or in other words, cases that involve penalties of less than EUR 200 000 (previously 
EUR 50 000) do not fall under this regime and are therefore not always made public.  
vi. Proposed reforms to the non-trial resolutions framework 
189. The Minister of Justice and Security presented a proposal to the House of Representatives on 19 
December 2018 for amendments to the existing framework for non-trial resolutions. Specifically, article 74 
DCC would be amended to provide for judicial oversight of non-trial resolution of criminal proceedings. 
The stated purpose of the amendments is to ensure greater transparency for the general public. 
190. The Netherlands indicates that under the proposed amendments—which the MJS will develop in 
consultation with the OM and the judiciary—judicial oversight may only apply to large transactions in 
accordance with the revised Directive. Judicial oversight could be carried out through a closed hearing of 
the parties (the OM and the defendant) in chambers. Mandatory legal aid could be made available to 
defendants. The court could apply a reasonableness test to factors such as the presence of sufficient 
evidence, the procedure by which the settlement comes about and compliance with the conditions for a 
large transaction. The court could apply the test of reasonableness based on the information supplied by the 
OM and FIOD, rather than conducting any further investigation itself. The Netherlands indicates that it 
would be foreseeable for the final result of the judicial review to be made public, including publication of 
the offences for which the resolution was confirmed after judicial review. It is to be determined whether 
this would apply to all non-trial resolutions or only those with penalties above EUR 200 000 (as is the case 
under the revised Directive). A working group has been convened within the MJS to develop the proposed 
legislation, which is expected to be issued for public consultation as soon as possible, in close consultation 
with relevant parties. In general, the legislation process in the Netherlands takes two years from initial 
drafting to enactment, depending on the specific circumstances.  
191. In parallel, the revised Directive on Large Transactions became effective on 4 September 2020 
and applies as an interim measure to replace ministerial approval with the Review Committee for Large 
Transactions, in advance of the proposed reforms to article 74 DCC to introduce judicial oversight. The 
Directive provides “[f] For some time now, there has been a political desire to establish legally that the 
                                                      
111
 SBM Offshore N.V. settles bribery case for US $240,000,000 (12 November 2014); International fight against 
corruption: Telia Company pays 274.000.000 US Dollars to the Netherlands (21 September 2017); Vimpelcom pays 
close to 400 million dollars to the Netherlands for bribery in Uzbekistan (18 February 2016). 
112
 OM website, “ING pays 775 million due to serious shortcomings in money laundering prevention” (4 September 
2018). 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

66        
 
for non-trial resolutions with judicial oversight. The lead examiners therefore recommend that the 
Netherlands pursue the proposed reforms to its non-trial resolution framework as a priority and in this 
context: 
a) publish, as necessary and in compliance with the relevant rules, the essential elements of 
resolutions in all foreign bribery cases, including resolutions under EUR 200 000; 
b) introduce, as planned, appropriate oversight of proposed non-trial resolutions in foreign 
114
bribery cases;  
c) provide guidance on procedures for self-reporting and the level of cooperation expected from 
defendants; 
d) clarify if and under which conditions non-trial resolutions are available to natural persons in 
foreign bribery cases, including under the Directive on Large Transactions; 
e) provide further guidance and training on factors to be taken into account when determining 
penalties in non-trial resolutions, and imposing and enforcing additional measures such as 
compliance monitors and remedial compliance actions. 
B.5. Sanctioning a Foreign Bribery Case 
194. In Phase 3, the Working Group recommended that the Netherlands proceed with proposed 
amendments to the DCC to increase the level of sanctions (Recommendation 4(a)) and decided to follow-
up on the application in practice of sanctions and confiscation measures in the context of ongoing and future 
foreign bribery investigations in the Netherlands (Follow-Up Issue 11(c)). At the time of the the Phase 3 
Written Follow-up, the Netherlands had passed amendments to the foreign bribery offence in the DCC 
which entered into force on 1 January 2015. The maximum term of imprisonment was increased, and an 
additional, optional penalty of maximum 10% of previous annual turnover included for legal persons. The 
Working Group considered Phase 3 recommendation 4(a) fully implemented but decided to conduct a full 
evaluation of the amended law in Phase 4.  
a. Sanctions applicable to natural persons for foreign bribery 
195. The foreign bribery offence is punishable by imprisonment or, alternatively, a fifth category fine. 
The maximum amounts attributed to the categories of fines are set out under article 23(4) DCC and are 
updated every two years based on the consumer price index. In Phase 3, the foreign bribery offence included 
a distinction between bribes to act in breach of the official’s duty, punishable by a maximum of 4 years of 
imprisonment, and bribes to act within the scope of duty, punishable by a maximum of 2 years of 
imprisonment. The alternative fifth category fine was set to a maximum of EUR 78 000 (article 177 DCC).  
                                                      
114
 The Netherlands is already planning the introduction of judicial oversight over non-trial resolutions. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

68        
 
as payment of the estimated proceeds of crime. Fines imposed by non-trial resolution need to be calculated 
in accordance with the statutory maximum established under articles 177 and 178 by reference to the 
categories set out under article 23(4) DCC. Therefore, a foreign bribery case concluded against a natural 
person via non-trial resolution will carry a maximum sanction of EUR 87 000 per each individual crime, 
which can be imposed cumulatively if there are numerous bribe payments or additional offences (such as 
money laundering). 
200. Two natural persons have been sanctioned for foreign bribery by non-trial resolution under article 
74 DCC in the context of Case A. Two legal persons and two natural persons are still under investigation 
in connection with the case. This investigation was discontinued against two other natural persons in 2016 
due to their very small role in the facts. A total amount of USD 434 983.30 was paid in bribes, namely 11 
small payments in order to obtain 11 different contracts, the value of which ranged between USD 580 600 
and USD 1 495 000. One natural person was sanctioned in 2016 with a EUR 20 000 fine and 40 hours of 
community service for bribery regarding one of the contracts. The second person, who had a minor role in 
the company and no decision-making powers, was sanctioned with a EUR 5 000 fine and 80 hours of 
community service.These sanctions are on the lower end of the spectrum of the available sanctions against 
natural persons. Although this may be justified by the small role that these two individuals played in the 
overall bribery scheme, it is still illustrative of the Netherlands’ failure to impose sanctions on senior 
management. 
201. According to the Netherlands, non-trial resolutions reached with legal persons do not extend to 
the natural persons involved and a separate decision is made regarding their prosecution. However, 
according to information provided by the Netherlands on enforcement data, in the Ballast Nedam case, a 
criminal investigation into foreign bribery and money laundering was discontinued against six natural 
persons following the conclusion of the case with the company and because of it. To date, one natural 
person has been sanctioned for partly foreign bribery-predicated money laundering, also through a non-trial 
resolution, in the context of the Ballast Nedam case. Another natural person was convicted at trial and 
sanctioned for money laundering predicated in commercial bribery in connection with the same case.   
202. Although the FP’s policy is to prioritise prosecution of natural persons over non-trial resolutions, 
the case data so far only allows for the assessment of sanctions imposed in the context of resolutions. It is 
not clear how courts will apply the new sanctions framework in foreign bribery cases involving natural 
persons and, consequently, in which circumstances prison sentences will be preferred over fines and vice-
versa. There is also no legal impediment to more serious instances of foreign bribery committed by natural 
persons to be resolved via non-trial resolution. It appears, therefore, that in these circumstances, where a 
fine is the only applicable sanction, the current statutory maximum of EUR 87 000 (excluding 
confiscation), although able to be applied cumulatively in cases involving multiple offences, may not prove 
sufficiently effective, proportionate and dissuasive, as per the standards set out under Article 3 of the 
Convention. 
c. Sanctions available for legal persons for foreign bribery 
203. Under article 23(7) DCC, the sanction applicable to a legal person corresponds to the next 
category as the one applicable to natural persons. Therefore, as the maximum fine applicable to natural 
persons under articles 177 and 178 DCC is a fifth category fine, the maximum fine applicable to a legal 
person is a sixth category fine which corresponds to an amount of EUR 870 000. Importantly, the 2015 
reform of the DCC also allowed for the imposition of a fine up to ten per cent of the legal person’s annual 
turnover in the preceding fiscal year, provided the maximum amount of the sixth category fine is not 
deemed appropriate in the particular circumstances of the case. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

70        
 
business, given that the amounts imposed were exceedingly low when compared to the profit obtained from 
115
engaging in corrupt practices. 
209. The data provided by the Netherlands regarding cases involving foreign bribery and money 
laundering predicated on foreign bribery indicates that 53 legal persons have been investigated for at least 
one of the two offences since 2006. Since Phase 3, the Netherlands has sanctioned seven legal persons for 
the foreign bribery offence by means of non-trial resolution. One legal person (Takilant) was convicted by 
a trial in absentia for passive bribery in connection with the Vimpelcom case and the Teliasonera case. 
Please see Table 2 below for further details. 
Table 2. Sanctions imposed on legal persons in cases of foreign bribery and related offences 
Approx. value of Approx. value of the 
 Legal Person Sanctions 
the bribe advantage 
Ballast Nedam EUR 1 billion EUR 45 billion across Total EUR 17.5 million 
several military and 
(non-trial resolution Fine EUR 5 million; 
construction contracts 
2012) Confiscation 
EUR 12.5 million 
EUR 200 million USD 2.8 billion in 
SBM Offshore Total USD 240 million 
contracts with SOEs in 
(non-trial resolution Fine USD 40 million 
3 different countries 
2014) Confiscation 
USD 200 million 
Vimpelcom USD 114.5 million USD 335 million in Total USD 397.5 million 
Limited gross earnings since paid to the Netherlands 
entering the Uzbek 
(Total including resolution 
Silkway Holdings 
market in 2012 
with  other jurisdictions : 
BV 
USD 795 million) 
Foreign Fine USD 230 million 
Bribery  
Confiscation 
USD 167.5 million 
Sonera Holding BV USD 314.2 million USD 457 million in Total USD 274 million 
in bribes and gross earnings since 
paid to the Netherlands 
 Teliasonera UTA 
approx. 27.3 entering the Uzbek 
(Total including resolution 
Holding BV  
million in market in 2014 
with other jurisdictions: 
Teliasonera Uzbek ‘sponsorship’ and 
USD 965 million) 
‘charitable 
Telecom Holding 
Fine USD 100 million 
contributions’ in 
BV 
Confiscation 
Uzbekistan 
(non-trial resolution 
USD 174 million + 
2017) 
USD 208.5 million (which 
originally should have 
gone to Sweden but 
reverted to the Netherlands 
when the parent company 
was acquitted in Sweden) 
                                                      
115
 Netherlands Phase 3 report, para. 50. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

72        
 
confiscation regime. The Directive on Confiscation issued by the Board of Prosecutors’ General sets out 
the rules and options available to prosecutors regarding the confiscation of illegal proceeds of crime. The 
recent revisions to the Directive on Foreign Corruption provide that all investigation plans prepared for 
foreign bribery cases “should include a section on the scope for depriving offenders of their illegally 
obtained advantage.” Law enforcement agencies at the on-site visit stated that the legal framework in place 
was sufficiently robust to allow them to confiscate illegal proceeds of crime. They noted, however, that 
resources were insufficient to deal with every case and asset confiscation prosecutors therefore needed to 
focus on the most important cases (see, Functioneel Parket).  
215. When determining amounts for confiscation in foreign bribery cases, FIOD-ACC provides FP 
prosecutors with the necessary information and expertise to calculate the appropriate amounts that should 
be considered as illegal proceeds of criminal activity. In particularly complex or sensitive cases, a 
prosecutor specialising in confiscation will aid the lead prosecutor in this task (for further information, see 
Overview of investigative and prosecutorial authorities in charge of foreign bribery enforcement). The OM 
sets annual targets for the total amount of proceeds of crime it aims to confiscate (EUR171 million in 2018 
and 2019), which are established based on results of previous years. There are no crime-specific annual 
targets. Prosecutors at the on-site visit confirmed that in recent years the target has always been met mostly 
due to the amounts confiscated in the context of foreign bribery cases. As discussed below, in relation to 
tax measures for combating bribery, the Netherlands officially allows for the tax deductibility of confiscated 
amounts however, in some non-trial resolutions companies have undertaken not to claim tax relief on 
confiscation. 
i. No confiscation of unlawful proceeds of crime in foreign bribery cases for natural 
persons 
216. Confiscation measures have not been imposed on any natural persons for the foreign bribery 
offence, including against the two natural persons who were sanctioned for foreign bribery by means of a 
non-trial resolution. The only confiscation measure imposed to date in connection with a foreign bribery 
case was in the context of the Ballast Nedam case. Its former CFO was prosecuted and convicted of money 
laundering predicated on commercial bribery and a total of EUR 5.1 million were confiscated as illegal 
117
proceeds. Interestingly, the court considered that the illegal proceeds did not derive from the money 
laundering offence, but rather from the compensation received in the context of the non-official bribery. 
The judgment of the court of 10 July 2018 mentions the defendant as guilty of commercial bribery, even 
though the defendant was not charged with that offence because the facts were time-barred. Article 36e 
DCC (in this case in the version in force prior to 2011, since the facts of the case preceded the article’s 
amendment) allows the court to assess whether it is plausible that other offences have led the convicted 
person to obtain an unlawful advantage. The fact that the other offence in itself is time-barred does not 
118
prevent confiscation from being decreed. Confiscation has been imposed on natural persons in 
119
commercial bribery fraud cases.  
                                                      
117
 Middle-Netherlands Court (Utrecht, 10 July 2018), ECLI: NL: RBMNE: 2018: 3173 (in Dutch). 
118
 Supreme Court 7 July 2009, ECLI: NL: HR: 2009: BI2307. 
119
 See, for example, Judgment of the Court of Amsterdam of 6 January 2017 (ECLI: NL: RBAMS: 2017: 3801, in 
Dutch); OM Website, “Deprivation of 1.1 million euros due to 7 000 hours of undelivered care” (19 December 2019, 
in Dutch). 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

74        
 
Regarding sanctions imposed on legal persons, the lead examiners note the high level of fines imposed 
in the context of the four foreign bribery cases concluded by non-trial resolutions, to date. However, they 
are concerned about the lack of transparency in the method of calculating these fines. They would 
welcome the implementation of guidelines for the OM in the context of foreign bribery cases, which 
could be established under the current revision of the framework for non-trial resolutions (see the 
commentary on Non-Trial Resolutions). 
In relation to natural persons, despite the increase in the maximum prison sentences, the lead examiners 
note that the very few cases concluded to date have involved out-of-court resolutions and, consequently, 
the imposition of fines. In this context, concerns therefore remain that the level of fines available is too 
low to ensure that criminal penalties for natural persons are effective, proportionate and dissuasive in 
practice. The lead examiners therefore recommend that the Netherlands increase the maximum fines 
available for natural persons for foreign bribery or take other measures to ensure that the sanctions 
imposed in practice meet the standards set out under Article 3 of the Convention of effective, 
proportionate and dissuasive sanctions.  
The lead examiners commend the Netherlands on its proactive and innovative approach to confiscation 
in major foreign bribery and related money laundering cases which has yielded impressive results. They 
note, however, that there are no examples of confiscation imposed on natural persons thus far, and 
encourage the authorities in the Netherlands to ensure the same level of proactivity when sanctioning 
individuals. 
B.6.  Mutual Legal Assistance and Extradition in Foreign Bribery Cases 
a. Overview of framework for international cooperation 
221. Since Phase 3, the DCPC provisions governing MLA were amended in 2018 to remove the 
requirement for a specific international cooperation treaty in order to provide MLA in criminal cases (article 
5.1.4 DCPC). This has major consequences for cooperation with other countries, as the Netherlands can 
now cooperate with more countries in cases where no MLA treaty applies. As in Phase 3, MLA requests 
from or to EU countries may be handled directly at the law enforcement level.  
222. In the Netherlands, the MJS is the Central Authority for the receipt, assessment and transmission 
of requests for international cooperation. The role of the Central Authority is delegated to the Department 
of International Affairs and Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters (AIRS). As it relates to non-EU countries 
and as explained in the Phase 3 evaluation, a team of 20 officials in the Central Authority handle MLA 
requests, assess if the requirements are met and then forward them to the competent prosecuting authorities. 
The OM has an international legal assistance centre at national level (LIRC), which advises on and oversees 
international cooperation in criminal matters. The LIRC consists of a public prosecutor, a prosecutor's clerk, 
legal support staff, police detectives and clerical staff. These members of the team assist the OM in drafting 
and sending European arrest warrants, and MLA and extradition requests from non-EU countries. The LIRC 
also handles the execution of foreign requests for international cooperation to the Netherlands.  
223. In addition to regional IRCs and the LIRC, a dedicated IRC was set up within the FP in 2018. The 
IRC FP’s prosecutor and legal officers process MLA requests, which they then forward to FIOD’s 
international department for execution. Once executed by FIOD, the response to the MLA request is sent 
back to the IRC FP to forward to the requesting country.  
224. The IRC FP received almost 1 000 requests in 2019 relating to tax crime, financial crime and 
economic crime. When the national or a regional IRC receives MLA requests relating to foreign bribery, 
they forward these to the IRC FP. In turn, the IRC FP forwards any incoming MLA request relating 
specifically to foreign bribery to the NCPC. The Netherlands also permits police-to-police cooperation, so 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

76        
 
 the absence of an independent judiciary;  
 the possibility of the death penalty being imposed for the facts disclosed in the MLA request; 
 exceptionally poor detention conditions;  
 an asylum status or an ongoing immigration law process of persons referred to in the MLA 
request; 
 whether the person concerned belongs to a vulnerable group in view of race or ethnicity, political 
beliefs, religious or philosophical beliefs, membership of a union, sexual orientation or 
occupation;  
 the risk of other blatant human rights violations, such as an unfair trial;  
 inadequate medical care or inadequate access to counsel; 
 the possibilities of obtaining guarantees from the requested country against any of these 
outcomes. 
228. In the event of a disagreement between the public prosecutor, IRC and AIRS in the assessment of 
the feasibility of the MLA request, the agencies consult with each other to reach a solution. The Minister 
of Justice and Security, on the advice of AIRS, will take the ultimate decision whether the international 
cooperation is desirable with the specific country outside the EU, “and whether the risks outweigh the 
123
importance of the Dutch investigation.” The Dutch authorities indicated that all decisions are based on 
cooperation with all parties involved. Prosecutors at the on-site visit indicated that while the Protocol is 
silent as to the consequences for a case if prosecutors request MLA in violation of the new assessment 
framework, it was clear that prosecutors are expected to follow the protocol. It is therefore possible that 
evidence obtained through MLA requests issued in breach of the Protocol could be deemed inadmissible in 
criminal proceedings. 
229. The evaluation team is concerned, particularly in the broader context of political intervention in 
foreign bribery cases discussed above (see, Independence) that the Protocol grants power to the Minister of 
Justice and Security to veto MLA requests in certain cases thereby risking the consideration of factors 
prohibited in Article 5 of the Convention in making these assessments. Furthermore, the first ground that 
can be taken into consideration in refusing to issue an MLA request is the possibility that foreign authorities 
will conduct their own investigation – a practice that is encouraged by the Working Group on Bribery, 
noting that MLA requests are an important source of detection. This assessment framework could lead 
either to prosecutors not issuing MLA requests for fear of the consequences (or indeed in anticipation of 
denial of authorisation) or to MLA requests for vital evidence in foreign bribery cases being denied on the 
grounds of a potential investigation in the requested country, thereby creating significant impediments to 
foreign bribery investigations and prosecutions.  
b. Incoming and outgoing MLA in foreign bribery cases 
230. With respect to outgoing foreign bribery-related MLA requests, the Netherlands indicated that, 
between 2015 and 2018 (inclusive), it had made 21 requests (to 16 Parties to the Convention). Of the 21, 
five were granted and one was withdrawn. With respect to incoming foreign bribery-related MLA requests, 
the Netherlands indicated that, between 2013 and 2018 (inclusive), it had 67 incoming MLA requests (from 
42 to Parties to the Convention). It granted 65 and only one was rejected due to the witness not being in the 
Netherlands. On average, the Netherlands took 10.5 months to answer the incoming MLA requests. Among 
                                                      
123
 Protocol on International Legal Assistance.  
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

78        
 
coordination meetings were held within the Eurojust framework and the OM met with five other national 
prosecution services to discuss the alleged facts and how they concerned each country. The Dutch 
authorities indicated having used a JIT inside the EU for a foreign bribery case and outside the European 
framework for cases not related to foreign bribery.  
235. The Dutch authorities also appear to have a positive approach to spontaneous information sharing. 
FIOD officers indicated wiretap information disclosed potential criminal offences abroad, which the 
Netherlands did not have jurisdiction to prosecute. The FIOD then gathered that wiretap information and 
shared it with the country in question. In another case concluded by non-trial resolution, the natural persons 
were all located abroad so the Dutch authorities went through Eurojust to spontaneously share the 
information that had been obtained in the context of the resolution.  
d. Extradition 
236. In Phase 3, the Working Group decided to follow-up the issue of extradition to ensure that the 
Netherlands takes any measures necessary to assure either that it can extradite its nationals for foreign 
bribery or that it can prosecute its nationals for foreign bribery (Follow-up Issue 11(d)). This was because 
under Dutch law, where the court decides to grant an extradition request, the Minister of Justice and Security 
has the discretion to refuse the application if s/he considers there are good grounds for believing that the 
person in question would be prosecuted on account of her/his religious or political convictions, and where 
the offence is of a political nature. The Minister had overruled a court decision to grant extradition of a 
Dutch national in a corruption case in 2008, but the case pre-dated the enactment of the foreign bribery 
offence in the Netherlands and could therefore not be prosecuted. In its responses to the questionnaire, the 
Netherlands indicated that the Luris system did not store information on extradition cases and it was 
therefore impossible to ascertain whether any extradition requests in bribery cases have been rejected by 
the Netherlands since Phase 3. MJS representatives indicated that the Luris system will be replaced by a 
new system, Dias, which will be able to organise cases more efficiently and generate more detailed data.  
Commentary 
The lead examiners commend the Netherlands for its strong and effective framework for international 
cooperation in foreign bribery cases, which embraces informal cooperation and spontaneous exchange 
of information. They note, however, the difficulties in providing full international cooperation, especially 
in countries with non-criminal forms of corporate liability. They therefore recommend that the 
Netherlands, to the fullest extent possible within its legal system, ensure that a broad range of MLA can 
be provided to Parties to the Convention that apply civil or administrative (and not criminal) liability to 
legal persons for foreign bribery and take necessary measures to ensure that information covered by 
data protection can be disclosed to the fullest extent possible.  
While the lead examiners recognise the need to balance human rights considerations with the public 
interest in investigating and prosecuting offences, they are concerned at the powers granted to the 
Minister of Justice and Security in the new Protocol on International Cooperation to refuse to issue an 
MLA request. They further note that the Protocol is silent as to the role and powers of the FIOD in 
international cooperation. They recommend that the Netherlands amend the Protocol to reflect the role 
of the FIOD in international cooperation and to ensure that the opening of an investigation in the 
requested country is not the sole ground for refusing to issue an MLA request.  
Finally, with respect to extradition, the lead examiners are disappointed that the Netherlands was unable 
to provide information on extradition requests in bribery cases since Phase 3. In this respect, and further 
to Phase 3 follow-up issue 11(d), they recommend that the Netherlands take necessary measures to 
ensure that the database for requests for international cooperation records information on the existence 
and status of extradition requests, by category of crime including bribery, to monitor whether any Dutch 
nationals not extradited for foreign bribery offences are prosecuted, as appropriate. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

80        
 
were of the opinion that this jurisprudence would be applied in foreign bribery cases in the same way as it 
has been applied to other economic and financial crimes.  
240. The Phase 3 report of the Netherlands discussed the issue of ‘probationary periods’ and 
recommended clearer guidance on their use in foreign bribery cases (recommendation 2(d)). Probationary 
periods, as set out in article 167 (2) DCPC allow a ‘deferred prosecution’ on the condition of remedial 
action to be undertaken by a company. Should the company violate the terms of probation or reoffend, it 
will be prosecuted for that offence, as well as for the offence for which it was conditionally dismissed. In 
the questionnaire responses, the Netherlands indicated that probationary periods are used on a case-by-case 
basis and when certain pre-conditions are fulfilled (avoiding possible bankruptcy by the company or 
adverse social impact). However, the evaluation team heard from both prosecutors and private sector 
representatives that the use of such probationary periods is unusual and they had not been applied to 
companies involved in large economic or financial crimes, let alone foreign bribery. In particular, private 
sector representatives at the on-site were of the view that instead of probationary periods it would be more 
useful to include the possibility of so-called declinations based on a thorough compliance system and 
general guidelines on self-reporting and settlements.  
b. In principle, Dutch companies are liable for foreign bribery by related legal persons  
241. In Phase 3, the WGB expressed concern that article 51 DCC may not extend liability to parent or 
sister companies for bribery by related legal persons, since the law only provides for liability of the bribery 
“in connection with the regular business of the company.” At the on-site visit, legal practitioners considered 
that a company could be held liable for acts of related legal persons because the offence must be interpreted 
126
in a broad functional sense and that this position is supported by Supreme Court case law.  
242. Prosecutors indicated that in a foreign bribery case where a non-Dutch subsidiary was involved, 
the Dutch parent company could be prosecuted if it could be proven that the act was carried out “in the 
sphere of the legal entity.” Prosecutors also indicated that it would be easier to prosecute the parent 
company as the ‘factual leader’ who commissioned the offence relying on article 51(2) (ii) DCC or use the 
DCC conspiracy offences. There is no case law confirming either of these approaches in foreign bribery 
cases, to date and therefore the relevant test to attribute knowledge is unclear. Authorities indicated that 
there are several ongoing investigations into legal persons suspected of using intermediaries to bribe foreign 
public officials that would potentially lead to case law developments.  
c. Case law developments in jurisdiction over legal persons, including mailbox 
companies, but confusion remains 
243. In relation to exercising jurisdiction over legal persons, the Phase 3 evaluation found that it would 
be difficult to establish jurisdiction when a Dutch legal person uses a non-Dutch person (natural or legal) 
to bribe a foreign public official while outside the Netherlands. The Netherlands confirmed in its Phase 4 
questionnaire responses that a foreign subsidiary could not be prosecuted in the Netherlands for acts it 
commits abroad. However, the Dutch parent company could be held liable for the illegal conduct of its 
subsidiary abroad if such conduct can be proven to be in the sphere of the Dutch parent company. 
Prosecutors at the on-site visit explained that they would indeed try to pursue a case against the parent 
company but evidentiary thresholds could potentially be a difficulty.  
                                                      
126
 Court of Overijssel 22-11-2018 ECLI:NL:RBOVE:2018:4453 (commercial bribery case regarding the bribe of a 
google employee). 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

82        
 
e. Clarity needed on compliance as an affirmative defence 
248. As noted above, the Supreme Court in the Zijpe case established autonomous liability of legal 
persons. The Court explained that a legal person could be held liable for a criminal offence committed by 
its employees, if it was conducted within the sphere of the legal person. One of the factors taken into account 
is whether the behaviour was under the control of, accepted or deemed to have been accepted, or failed to 
have been prevented by the company. Acceptance would be deemed to exist if the legal person did not 
prevent the act although it was in its power to do so. This could potentially allow compliance to be pleaded 
as an ‘affirmative defence’; where a compliance program would determine liability or be taken into account 
by a prosecutor in a decision to prosecute. According to the Dutch authorities, if a company had adequate 
procedures (not only a good compliance program) to prevent its natural persons from undertaking criminal 
conduct, it could potentially escape liability.  
249. Private sector representatives interviewed at the on-site were adamant that the possibility of 
compliance being an affirmative defence, although promising, was still surrounded by a lot of uncertainty 
and echoed questions already raised in Phase 3, in particular what adequate procedures or compliance 
measures would suffice to avoid liability. Private sector representatives reiterated the need to introduce 
guidance for assessing compliance or any other preventive mechanism as a defence and stated that it would 
be beneficial to know what a satisfactory compliance program would look like from a prosecutor’s point of 
view. Law enforcement officials also expressed the need for guidance and training on how to assess the 
effectiveness of compliance programmes, including enhanced compliance after the facts occurred or 
whether a company took enough measures to prevent it from happening again in the future. These positions 
echo those already expressed in Phase 3 when lawyers indicated the need to formalise this defence in law, 
129
given the lack of jurisprudence.  
C.2.  Engagement with the Private Sector 
250. In Phase 3 the Working Group called on the Netherlands to continue its efforts to encourage 
companies, especially SMEs, to develop internal controls, ethics and compliance systems to prevent and 
detect foreign bribery, including by promoting the OECD Good Practice Guidance on Internal Controls, 
130
Ethics and Compliance (Recommendation 8). This recommendation was considered partially 
implemented at the time of the Written Follow-up, as the Working Group considered that more could be 
131
done to engage the private sector.  
251. Various authorities play a role in engaging with the private sector to prevent, detect and promote 
reporting of foreign bribery. The MJS and MFA are primarily responsible for this. Foreign bribery 
awareness raising is conducted with external stakeholders such as law and accountancy firms, compliance 
officials and audit and fraud specialists through presentations by FP prosecutors, FIOD-ACC investigators 
and publications (i.e. press releases about settlements). In addition, ICC Netherlands has set up the Week 
of Integrity, a multi-stakeholder platform on ‘integrity encouragement’.  This platform is intended for 
financial and compliance professionals and includes specific content on foreign bribery, along with 
meetings twice a year and its annual Week of Integrity.  During the Week of Integrity, private and public 
sector representatives, academics and NGOs join forces to raise awareness of the importance of ethical 
                                                      
129
 Netherlands Phase 3 Report, para. 37.  
130
 Netherlands Phase 3 Report, recommendation 8, p. 53. 
131
 Netherlands Phase 3 Written Follow-up Report, para. 7. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

84        
 
exercising nationality jurisdiction over legal persons. However, the Working Group should follow-up of 
relevant case law developments to ensure that:  
a) Parent companies can be held liable for the acts of foreign subsidiaries; 
b)  Jurisdiction can be exercised over mailbox companies for the purposes of prosecuting foreign 
bribery; and 
The lead examiners are also encouraged by the efforts of various Dutch authorities to engage the private 
sector and note strong awareness of foreign bribery risks among large companies. However, they are 
concerned that guidance is lacking on what is expected of a company in terms of adequate procedures 
and an anti-bribery compliance program, in particular given that this can be a relevant factor when 
establishing liability or calculating penalties and imposing remedial measures, particularly in the 
context of settlements. They are also concerned about SMEs being left behind in anti-bribery compliance 
measures, and therefore consider that Phase 3 recommendation 8 concerning awareness raising among 
SMEs remains partially implemented. The evaluation team recommends that the Netherlands issue 
guidance for companies on effective anti-bribery compliance programmes, and disseminate more 
targeted information for SMEs on implementing anti-bribery compliance measures to effectively prevent 
and detect foreign bribery.  
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

86        
 
of crime, calculated as the profits derived from facilitating the bribe payments as a service provider for 
Ballast Nedam. The proceedings against the individual accountants are ongoing following the OM’s appeal 
of a first instance dismissal of the case in April 2018 (see above, Non-Trial Resolutions). 
261. The largest penalty imposed in the context of a non-trial resolution in the Netherlands to date was 
the ING Bank case. An investigation by the FIOD into several of the bank’s account holders revealed that 
hundreds of millions of euros were being laundered through those accounts. Among the accounts 
investigated were those connected to the Vimpelcom case. The sanctions imposed on ING in this case were 
therefore related to foreign bribery-based money laundering although the bank was charged with violating 
the AML compliance and due diligence requirements of the Wwft. ING was also charged with negligent 
money laundering for failing to prevent bank accounts held by its clients from being used to launder money 
between 2010 and 2016. ING paid a EUR 675 million fine and EUR 100 million in confiscated proceeds 
of crime. According to the OM press release, and as confirmed by the authorities at the on-site, the amount 
for confiscation was calculated based on “savings accumulated over a period of years on expenditure of 
134
personnel whose task would have been to ensure the implementation of the compliance policy”.  
D.2. Tax measures for combating bribery 
a. Non-deductibility of bribes needs to be ensured post-enforcement 
262. The Netherlands received only one recommendation on tax measures in Phase 3 (recommendation 
7), which the WGB deemed fully implemented during its Phase 3 Written Follow-up report. The 
recommendation asked the Netherlands to encourage law enforcement authorities to promptly share 
information on foreign bribery enforcement actions with the tax administration to verify whether bribes 
were impermissibly deducted. 
263. Section 3.14(1)(h) of the Income Tax Act lists the following costs excluded from deductions: 
“gifts, promises or services if it appears that a criminal act has occurred as referred to in Articles 126(1), 
177, 178, 178a, 328ter(2) or 328quater(2) of the DCC.” The extended definition of public official in article 
178a DCC is included and therefore the non-deductibility of bribes applies to bribery of foreign public 
officials. As noted in the Phase 3 evaluation, small facilitation payments are criminalised and would 
therefore not be tax deductible; a conviction is not required to deny tax deductibility; and taxpayers are 
required to substantiate legitimate business expenditures. 
264. If a taxpayer is sanctioned in a foreign bribery case, the tax authorities should re-examine the tax 
returns for the relevant years to determine whether the bribes had been deducted. The TCA can impose an 
additional assessment within 5 years of the original tax return (article 16(3) General State Taxes Act). The 
5-year period can be extended to 12 years in case of income or capital components held or raised abroad 
(article 16(4)), this provision would apply to some foreign bribery cases, depending on the circumstances. 
The Netherlands’ responses to the Phase 4 questionnaire and discussions with TCA officials on-site 
confirmed that the TCA considered re-assessment of tax returns of the companies sanctioned for foreign 
bribery to date to ensure the non-deductibility of bribes throughout the relevant period. The reasons given 
for not re-opening the tax returns to ensure the non-deductibility of bribes include that the relevant tax 
returns related to a foreign subsidiary or because the bribes were paid via shares/participations which in the 
Netherlands is part of the 'participation exemption' (not taxable). However, the broader tax implications of 
these settlements were discussed and indeed agreed upon (see below, Tax Treatment of Confiscation).  
                                                      
134
 ING non-trial resolution press release. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

88        
 
recommendation was deemed not implemented during the Written Follow-Up Report and the Working 
Group considered that efforts could be made to raise awareness of the MJS database of convictions.  This 
list produces a Certificate of Conduct (GVA; gedragsverklaring aanbesteden), the equivalent to a criminal 
record that could potentially be useful in determining whether applicants are eligible to participate in public 
tender processes and also in the due diligence processes conducted for export credit insurance.  
a. Public Procurement 
269. The Public Procurement Act of 2012 comprises mandatory and optional grounds for exclusion 
that could potentially include convictions for foreign bribery (article 2.87). Article 2.86 refers to “bribery 
within the meaning of Article 3 of the Anti-Corruption Convention involving officials of the European 
Communities or of the Member States of the EU” meaning that a conviction of foreign bribery involving a 
public official of a country outside of the EU may not be a ground for mandatory debarment. As noted 
above, non-trial resolutions under article 74 DCC do not constitute convictions for the purposes of 
mandatory debarment from public procurement processes. However, they can be considered as an optional 
ground for exclusion (namely grave professional misconduct). PIANOo representatives at the on-site 
mentioned the case of a Spanish contractor being debarred in the Netherlands because of possible bribes 
136
paid in Spain. However, None of the companies sanctioned for foreign bribery in the Netherlands, to 
date, have been excluded from public procurement as all cases were concluded through non-trial resolutions 
270. The Phase 3 report noted increased anti-corruption efforts in public procurement processes, in 
particular a requirement for bidders to provide a pledge of non-conviction for foreign bribery, the GVA for 
137
legal persons and the VOG (Verklaring Omtrent Gedrag) for natural persons. Although still not 
mandatory, VOG/GVA are habitually used by contracting authorities and business and are valid for two 
years. In 2019, 835 GVAs were requested from the issuing authority JUSTIS per month (a total of about 
10 000 for the year). The Dutch authorities acknowledged the importance of the VOG/GVA to ensure that 
applicants do not have a criminal record for any of the exclusion grounds set out by the contracting authority 
and checked in the European Single Procurement Document. Foreign companies tendering for Dutch 
procurement projects may present a different certificate, such as those provided by their local authorities.  
Based on the directive 2014/24, a contracting authority is allowed to disregard a mandatory or optional 
exclusion ground in three situations: 
 Compelling public-interest reasons; (article 57 sub 3 Directive 2014/24) 
 The bidder has taken adequate measures to restore the betrayed confidence (article 57 sub 6 
Directive 2014/24); 
 Exclusion is not a proportionate sanction, in light of the time that has passed since the conviction 
and given the subject matter of the contract (article 57 sub 3 Directive 2014/24). 
                                                      
136
 De Volkskrant, “A Spanish company operating in road construction projects is the subject of numerous corruption 
investigations” (11 October 2019) 
137
 Regarding the VOG, there is a special department within the Ministry of Justice and Security (the screening 
authority JUSTIS) that is responsible for the issuance of VOG’s. Upon receiving a request for a VOG, JUSTIS will, 
among other things, consult the Criminal Records System. This system contains data on the conclusion of criminal 
proceedings (convictions, dismissals, out-of-court settlements, etc.) Additionally, JUSTIS can also use data from 
police records and obtain information from the Public Prosecution Service and the Probation Service. The Criminal 
Records System is, however, also used for other purposes (for instance by the Public Prosecution Service).  
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

90        
 
in the course of its business operations. In addition, account interviews are conducted with clients that 
regularly purchase export credit insurance.  
276. One of the subjects discussed in these interviews is the operational management, including 
compliance/control mechanisms. It appears that Atradius DSB’s enhanced due diligence process includes 
verification of appropriate internal corrective and preventative measures such as anti-bribery management 
control systems. To implement the 2019 Recommendation, the internal due diligence procedures have been 
adapted and additional sources used. Furthermore, all relevant parties to a transaction, such as joint venture 
partners, shareholders, sponsors and beneficial owners are identified and checked. In addition, a declaration 
is required from the insured party prior to policy issue in which the insured party states that there is no 
bribery involved with regard to the transaction and that all relevant information for the insurance has been 
provided. The general conditions of the export credit insurance scheme include an audit right.  
277. Atradius DSB has a complaints procedure, which can be used for complaints with regard to the 
export credit insurance. Complaints will be dealt with confidentially, but if a complainant so wishes, his/her 
report can be filed anonymously. Additionally, Atradius DSB requests applicants to declare in the 
application form whether they have been involved in bribery, if they have been convicted for bribery in the 
past five years, if there are any equivalent measures (such as settlements) with regard to bribery over the 
past five years or if  there are ongoing investigations with regard to bribery. If any of these questions are 
answered positively, this leads to an enhanced due diligence process. As stated by Atradius DSB, Ministry 
of Finance and Ministry of Foreign Affairs officials during the on-site visit, consideration is being given to 
the use of a GVA Certificate as part of the application process.  
278. Atradius DSB has not denied official export credit to companies sanctioned for foreign bribery 
through non-trial resolutions, to date, but instead has taken an approach that allows them to review the 
corrective measures undertaken. Cases in which Atradius DSB has continued to provide export credit to 
companies sanctioned for bribery raise concerns over the assessment of the effectiveness of corrective 
measures. For example, SBM Offshore Case was sanctioned in the Netherlands (2014), the United States 
(2017) and Brazil (2018) for bribery of foreign public officials with respect to bribery of Petrobras officials 
in Brazil (see also above, Foreign Bribery Cases in the Netherlands). In 2015 (one year after SBM Offshore 
was sanctioned in the Netherlands), Atradius DSB along with a consortium of other national export credit 
agencies, provided USD 800 million (out of a total USD 1.55 billion) in project financing insurance to SBM 
140
Offshore in what was the largest project financing in the company’s history. Dutch authorities assert that 
an external consultant was hired by Atradius DSB to assess the corrective measures undertaken by SBM 
Offshore. A positive conclusion of the assessment by the consultant was precedent for providing the 
insurance.   
279. The evaluation team heard Atradius DSB, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
officials indicate that while criminal convictions and settlements in foreign bribery cases are taken into 
consideration in due diligence processes, there are no legal grounds to debar companies convicted or 
sanctioned through non-trial resolutions from receiving insurance credit permanently. 
ii. Atradius DSB’s foreign bribery identification of red flags and referral processes need 
review  
280. Atradius DSB, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Foreign Affairs representatives at the on-site 
visit indicated that if, following an  export credit, they became aware of an exporter’s engagement in 
possible foreign bribery (e.g. through media reports), Atradius DSB officials would conduct enhanced due 
                                                      
140
 SBM Offshore Press release (27 July 2015), “SBM Offshore completes US$1.55 Billion financing of Ciudade de 
Saquarema”.  
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

92        
 
anti-bribery policy for the export credit scheme was launched, including all the steps that were needed to 
implement the 2019 Recommendation. Part of the new anti-bribery policy includes more stringent clauses 
in the general conditions of the export credit insurance. It was decided that the policy would be evaluated 
after two years and will therefore be reviewed at the end of 2020. 
iv. Awareness raising activities and coordination needs to be enhanced at Atradius DSB 
and other partners  
285. Atradius DSB, RVO and the DFI FMO have been sharing information and best practices including 
in relation to due diligence procedures for a number of years. Institutional changes are envisaged as the 
FMO has a subsidiary that will become part of a joint venture with the Dutch State and a new financial 
institution will provide export credits, investment loans and support to project development abroad. The 
law is being prepared, and will possibly be approved by parliament before the end of 2020.    
286. The FP and the FIOD recently held one seminar on raising awareness of corruption risks and 
recognising possible signs of corruption in the application process for Atradius DSB staff involved in the 
due diligence process. This is a step in the right direction, however in light of the cases described above, 
more systematic and specific training on preventing, identification of red flags, reporting and sanctioning 
foreign bribery in the context of export credit contracts is necessary.  
Commentary 
The lead examiners welcome the policies developed by Atradius DSB to implement the 2019 
Recommendation of the Council on Bribery and Officially Supported Export Credits, including 
requiring disclosure of information on third parties involved in representing the exporter. They are also 
encouraged by Atradius DSB actions to temporarily suspend credit to a Dutch company and conduct 
enhanced due diligence following its debarment by the World Bank. However, the lead examiners 
remain concerned about a lack of proactivity where it relates to companies sanctioned for foreign bribery 
in the Netherlands through non-trial resolutions. They note that, in spite of its disclosure requirements, 
Atradius DSB has never itself identified foreign bribery – even though some of the companies receiving 
support are the subject of alleged bribery and human rights violations in connection with transactions 
insured under the export credit scheme.  
They recommend that, in the context of the evaluation of its new anti-bribery policy planned for end-
2020, Atradius DSB undertake a comprehensive review of its policies to identify how they could better 
be applied in practice to enable identification of foreign bribery red flags and provide regular training 
to its staff.  
D.4. Official Development Assistance  
287. This Phase 4 evaluation is the first time the Netherlands’ ODA framework is reviewed in light of 
the 2016 Recommendation for Development Cooperation Actors on Managing Risks of Corruption (the 
2016 Recommendation) and in particular sections 6-8 and 10, which more directly pertain to foreign 
145 
bribery. 
                                                      
145
 The 2016 OECD Recommendation for Development Co-operation Actors on Managing Risks of Corruption 
replaces the 1996 DAC Recommendation on Anti-Corruption Proposals for Bilateral Aid Procurement. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

94        
 
b. Pre-grant prevention: Anti-corruption clauses and risk assessments 
291. In terms of measures to manage corruption risks and prevent and detect corruption in ODA 
contracts (Recommendations 5 and 6, 2016 ODA Recommendation), the MFA conducts a mandatory fraud 
and corruption risk assessment on the project appraisal document  for all project proposals. This assessment 
includes an identification of risks, how these risks affect the implementation of the project and the results. 
If necessary, mitigating measures for each identified risk must be included in the contract or grant decision. 
For ODA contracts valued at greater than EUR 1 million the MFA performs an Organisational Risk and 
Integrity Assessment (ORIA). This assessment considers the applicant organisation’s anti-fraud, anti-
corruption and integrity policy, along with its organisational structure, culture, internal controls, monitoring 
and evaluation system and risk management system. The MFA indicated that one-third of ODA contracts 
are above this threshold and therefore undergo an ORIA. An audit is mandatory for ODA projects over 
EUR 5 million and for projects between EUR 500 000 and EUR 5 million, an audit can be requested 
following the results of the risk assessment. 
292. RVO officials at the on-site visit indicated that they assess projects by the types of risks presented. 
RVO checks whether the company has a code of conduct and how its anti-corruption policy is implemented. 
147
In this context, it verifies the multilateral development banks’ lists of ineligible firms and individuals. If 
the company has been debarred, it cannot receive funding until the debarment is lifted. If RVO identifies 
corruption as a salient risk in the country the company will be operating in, it will discuss this with the 
company and inform the company about this risk and its responsibilities under Dutch Law. The RVO also 
runs a risk check on the company using risk analysis software. RVO officials indicated that they were in 
regular contact with Dutch embassies abroad, who assist with assessing local implementing partners and 
whether local public officials are involved in the project and present a risk of foreign bribery.  
c. Audit, detection and reporting 
293. Section 7 of the 2016 ODA Recommendation addresses reporting mechanisms and whistleblower 
protection. In its questionnaire responses, the MFA did not indicate what internal and/or external reporting 
mechanisms have been put in place to for reporting persons to report misconduct—and specifically foreign 
bribery—in the context of ODA projects. Grant contracts nevertheless require recipients to immediately 
notify the MFA of suspected or confirmed irregularities in the implementation of the grant activities. The 
MFA’s broader reporting framework is described above (Increasing detection through other potential 
sources: the role of the MFA and Embassies) and no foreign bribery reports have been received through 
this framework, to date. MFA officials at the on-site visit considered that fraud—rather than foreign 
bribery—was the main issue arising in ODA projects. They explained that if suspected fraud is detected in 
the context of an ODA project, the MFA engages external forensic auditors (usually from one of the ‘Big 
4’ firms) to investigate the allegations. The MFA provides the auditors with the parameters to investigate 
for fraud. It appears that specific red flags for foreign bribery are not systematically included in these 
parameters and the audit is case-specific. Based on the auditors’ investigation, the MFA will decide whether 
to apply sanctions to the company in question (see below, Sanctions).  
294. MFA officials receive substantial numbers of reports (suspicions) on fraud and corruption: 
between 2013 and 2015 there was an average of 25 reports per year, which increased to 68 reports in 2018 
and 74 in 2019. Auditors and whistleblowers usually make the reports, which most often relate to 
procurement fraud and falsification of paychecks. In 2019, the MFA sanctioned companies in connection 
                                                      
147
 For example, World Bank Listing of Ineligible Firms and Individuals. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

96        
 
MFA made two such exceptional reports to Parliament in relation to ODA contracts, neither of which 
involved suspicions of bribery of foreign public officials. 
d. Sanctions  
299. Recommendation 8 asks that ODA contracts provide for termination, suspension or 
reimbursement clauses when the information provided by applicants to ODA was false, or when the 
implementing partner subsequently engaged in corruption during the course of the contract. The legal basis 
for sanctions in an ODA context is the General Administrative Law Act (AWB) and the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs Grants Decree. Further specific obligations are usually laid down in individual decisions awarding 
grants. The main sanctions that can be imposed before the definitive amount of the grant has been 
determined are: (1) reducing the definitive amount of the grant to a lower amount than was originally 
awarded, (2) reducing or withdrawing the grant (measures which derive directly from the AWB and apply 
automatically to any grant) and (3) preventive measures (in exceptional circumstances). Even after the 
definitive amount of the grant has been determined, the grant can be reduced or withdrawn retroactively by 
means of a sanction.  
300. Section 4(35) of the AWB also provides for the possibility of taking measures before a grant is 
awarded. Applications may be rejected if there are well-founded reasons for concluding that: (1) some or 
all of the activities covered by the grant will not take place; (2) the grant recipient will not meet the grant 
conditions; (3) the applicant will not account properly for the funds provided. 
301. In practice, MFA officials at the on-site indicated that if the MFA receives information from an 
auditor, whistleblower or other source, about suspected misappropriation of ODA or non-ODA funds, it 
considers whether to suspend payments. If an applicant company cannot show that it has adequate policies 
in place, or has been sanctioned for corruption and has not subsequently implemented adequate policies, 
the MFA can decide to exclude a company from receiving the requested funding until it can demonstrate 
remedial efforts. This policy is based on the principle that improvement, rather than exclusion, should be 
the point of departure. In the past five years, three project applications were assessed as being ‘susceptible 
to fraud’, as well as not meeting other requirements for the project, and excluded before implementation.  
Commentary 
The lead examiners commend the Netherlands for implementing a robust and comprehensive framework 
to prevent, detect and sanction bribery of foreign public officials in the context of ODA projects. In 
particular, the Netherlands Enterprise Agency and Dutch Development Bank have implemented 
trainings and reporting mechanisms, resulting in effective reporting to law enforcement authorities and 
sanctions, where necessary. The lead examiners consider, however, that MFA officials overseeing ODA 
projects need further training on the indicators and reporting requirements for suspected foreign bribery 
and, more generally, corruption risks at large. In particular, they are concerned that the MFA’s 
investigation process could result in potential cases of foreign bribery not being subject to criminal 
investigation and sanction. They therefore recommend that the MFA, within its existing risk 
management procedures,  issue clear instructions on how to detect foreign bribery in ODA projects and 
on the concrete steps to be taken if suspicions of corruption should arise, including reporting the matter 
as appropriate to law enforcement authorities. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

98        
 
1. Recommendations of the Working Group 
Recommendations regarding the detection of foreign bribery 
1. Regarding anti-money laundering measures to enhance detection of foreign bribery, the 
Working Group recommends that the Netherlands’ FIU and other relevant agencies increase 
awareness-raising efforts with the legal profession on AML reporting obligations and red flags 
for foreign bribery-based money laundering, given the essential role the legal profession plays in 
setting up corporate structures and the particular risk these structures pose in Dutch economic 
context [Convention Article 7, 2009 Recommendation III.i].   
2. Regarding detection of foreign bribery by whistleblowers, the Working Group recommends that 
the Netherlands:  
a. amends the Whistleblower Authority Act to transpose the EU Whistleblower Protection 
Directive, as a priority [2009 Recommendation IX (iii)] and implement, as appropriate, the 
recommendations of the various evaluations of the Whistleblower Authority, to ensure that 
public and private sector employees that report suspected acts of foreign bribery are 
protected from discriminatory and disciplinary action;  
b. conduct training and awareness raising activities for the private sector and public agencies, 
specifically the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, on implementing the WAA’s requirements for 
effective internal protected reporting mechanisms and its amendments, once enacted [2009 
Recommendation IX iii)]; and  
c. ensure clear guidance and training are provided to the Whistleblower Authority officials 
on procedures for detection and reporting of the foreign bribery offence to criminal law 
enforcement authorities [2009 Recommendation IX iii)].  
3. Regarding detection of foreign bribery self-reporting, the Working Group recommends that the 
Netherlands’ authorities establish a clear policy and guidelines explaining the procedure for 
making self-reports and the extent to which self-reporting will be considered in resolving and 
sanctioning foreign bribery cases [Article 3 of the Convention; 2009 Recommendation III.i.].  
Recommendations regarding enforcement of the foreign bribery and related offences 
4. Regarding small facilitation payments, the Working Group recommends that the Netherlands, in 
the context of the recent amendment of the Directive on Foreign Corruption, conduct more 
targeted efforts, including training and awareness raising activities to encourage law enforcement 
officials, companies and professionals of the auditing and accounting profession to prevent, detect 
and report the use of facilitation payments [Convention Article 1; 2009 Recommendation III.ii 
and VI.i and ii] 
5. Regarding investigation and prosecution of foreign bribery, the Working Group recommends that 
the Netherlands: 
a. take urgent measures, as appropriate within its criminal justice system, to address delays 
caused by processes for assessing legal privilege claims in foreign bribery investigations 
[Convention Article 5, 2009 Recommendation Annex I B)]; 
b. conduct training and awareness raising for prosecutors and judges on the standards of the 
Anti-Bribery Convention, including the definition of foreign public official and liability for 
bribes paid through intermediaries and to third party beneficiaries [Convention, Article 1; 
2009 Recommendation, III. ii) et V]  ; 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

100        
 
targeted information for SMEs on implementing anti-bribery compliance measures to effectively 
prevent and detect foreign bribery [2009 Recommendation C i) and ii)]. 
Recommendations regarding other measures affecting implementation of the Convention: 
10. Regarding tax measures to combat foreign bribery, the Working Group recommends that the 
Netherlands ensure a consistent approach to tax treatment of confiscated amounts in foreign 
bribery cases [2009 Recommendation, VIII.i; 2009 Tax Recommendation]; 
11. Regarding public procurement, the Working Group recommends that the Netherlands;  
a. take steps to promote the use of the Certificate of Conduct (VOG/GVA)  by contracting 
institutions on both natural and legal persons to verify that tenderers have not been 
convicted of foreign bribery in the Netherlands [Convention, Article 3(4); 2009 
Recommendation XI.i]; and 
b. conduct training and awareness raising activities with procurement agencies on the 
debarment framework with respect to foreign bribery convictions, including in relation to 
the database of convictions and Certificates of Conduct (VOG/GVA). [Convention, Article 
3(4); 2009 Recommendation XI.i] 
12. Regarding export credits, the Working Group recommends that, in the context of the evaluation 
of its new anti-bribery policy planned for end-2020, Atradius DSB undertake a comprehensive 
review of its policies to identify how they could better be applied in practice to enable 
identification of foreign bribery red flags and provide regular training to its staff [Convention, 
Article 3(4); 2009 Recommendation XI.i; 2006 Export Credit Recommendation]. 
13. Regarding Official Development Assistance, the Working Group recommends that the MFA, 
within its existing risk management procedures, issue clear instructions on how to detect foreign 
bribery in ODA projects and on the concrete steps to be taken if suspicions corruption should 
arise, including reporting the matter as appropriate to law enforcement authorities [2016 
Recommendation for Development Cooperation Actors 7.iii.]. 
2. Follow-up by the Working Group 
14. The Working Group will follow up on the issues below as case law, practice, and legislation 
develops: 
a. The interpretation of the offence in practice to ensure that: 
i. The offer of a bribe is criminalised and enforced [Convention Article 1];  
ii. That the definition of ‘foreign public official’ is autonomous, sufficiently broad 
to cover employees of public enterprises and consistent with Article 1 of the Anti-
Bribery Convention [Convention Article 1 and Commentary 3] 
b. Whether the increase in resources increases the FIU Netherlands’ ability to process UTRs 
and provide feedback on their overall quality to the private sector, as it relates to the 
detection of foreign bribery [Convention Article 7; 2009 Recommendation III.i]; 
c. The implementation of the Source Protection in Criminal Matters Act, as it relates to 
ensuring protection of sources who report foreign bribery [2009 Recommendation IX (iii)]; 
d. The application of the foreign bribery offence in practice to ensure it is interpreted in 
conformity with the Convention [Articles 1 and 4 (a)]; 
e. The adequacy of human and financial resources to investigate and prosecute foreign bribery 
[Convention Article 5; 2009 Anti-Bribery Recommendation Annex I.D];  
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

102        
 
ANNEX 1: PHASE 3 RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE 
NETHERLANDS AND ASSESSMENT OF IMPLEMENTATION 
BY THE WORKING GROUP ON BRIBERY IN 2015 
Written follow-
Recommendations of the Working Group in Phase 3 up 
March 2015 
Recommendations for ensuring effective investigation, prosecution and sanctioning of foreign bribery 
1. Regarding the offence of bribing a foreign public official, the Working Group recommends that the Netherlands: 
a) Keep the Working Group on Bribery informed of developments concerning the adoption 
Fully 
 
of amendments to the foreign bribery offence in the Dutch Criminal Code [Convention, 
Implemented 
Article 1]; 
b) Periodically review its policy and approach on small facilitation payments, and continue 
to encourage Dutch companies to prohibit or discourage their use and in all cases, Partially 
 
accurately record them in companies‟ accounts [Convention, Article 1; 2009 Implemented 
Recommendation III. (ii) and VI.(i) and (ii)]; 
c) Continue to encourage Aruba and Sint Maarten to adopt a foreign bribery offence and 
Fully 
 assist them in their efforts to do so, in line with the rules governing its relationship 
Implemented 
[Convention, Article 1]. 
2. Regarding the criminal liability of legal persons, the Working Group recommends that the Netherlands: 
a) Take all possible measures to ensure that mailbox companies are considered legal 
entities under the Dutch Criminal Code and that cases of foreign bribery involving Partially 
 
mailbox companies can be effectively investigated, prosecuted and sanctioned Implemented 
[Convention, Article 2; 2009 Recommendation V]; 
b) Draw the attention of prosecutors to the importance of applying effectively the criminal 
Fully 
 liability of legal persons in foreign bribery cases, including for acts by intermediaries 
Implemented 
and related legal persons [Convention, Article 2; 2009 Recommendation V]; 
c) Continue to maintain detailed yearly statistics on the number of prosecutions of legal Fully 
 
persons [Convention, Article 2; 2009 Recommendation V]; Implemented 
d) Develop guidance on the application of probationary periods in foreign bribery cases 
 Not Implemented 
[Convention, Article 2; 2009 Recommendation V]. 
Regarding the investigation and prosecution of foreign bribery, the Working Group recommends 
3. 
that the Netherlands: 
a) Proactively gather information from diverse sources at the pre-investigative stage to 
Partially 
 increase the sources of allegations and to enhance investigations [Convention, Article 
Implemented 
5; 2009 Recommendation V]; 
b) Proactively investigate cases of foreign bribery involving legal persons, including Partially 
 
mailbox companies [Convention, Article 5; 2009 Recommendation V]; Implemented 
c) Exercise its jurisdiction in foreign bribery cases concerning Dutch natural or legal 
persons, and, where relevant, consult with other jurisdictions to determine the most 
Fully 
 appropriate jurisdiction for prosecution or consider undertaking concurrent or joint 
Implemented 
investigations [Convention, Articles 4 and 5; 2009 Recommendation V, XIII.(i) and 
(iii)]; 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

104        
 
Written follow-
Recommendations of the Working Group in Phase 3 up 
March 2015 
the public servants‟ field of activity, and that they are made aware of this duty [2009 
Recommendation IX.(ii)]; 
b) Put in place appropriate measures to protect from discriminatory or disciplinary action 
public and private sector employees who report suspected acts of foreign bribery in good 
 Not Implemented 
faith and on reasonable grounds to competent authorities [2009 Recommendation 
IX.(iii)]. 
Regarding public advantages, the Working Group recommends that the Netherlands promote 
the use of the Ministry of Security and Justice’s database of convictions more widely among 
10. Not Implemented 
public agencies to enhance due diligence and the application of exclusion rules, where 
appropriate [2009 Recommendation XI.(i)]. 
Written follow-
Phase 3 Issues for follow up by the Working Group up 
March 2015 
11. The Working Group will follow-up the issues below as case law and practice develops: 
a) The results of the analysis carried out by the Netherlands on the reasons for the decline 
 Issue resolved 
in prosecutions of legal persons [Convention, Article 2]; 
Follow-up in 
 b) The use of out-of-court settlements in foreign bribery cases [Convention, Article 5]; 
Phase 4 
c) The application in practice of sanctions and confiscation measures in on-going and Follow-up in 
 
future foreign bribery investigations [Convention, Article 3]; Phase 4 
d) That the Netherlands takes any measures necessary to assure either that it can extradite 
its nationals for foreign bribery or that it can prosecute its nationals for foreign bribery. 
Follow-up in 
 If the Netherlands declines a request to extradite a person for foreign bribery solely on 
Phase 4 
the grounds that the person is its national, it shall submit the case to its competent 
authorities for the purpose of prosecution [Convention, Article 10.3]. 
 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

106        
 
ANNEX 3: LEGISLATIVE EXTRACTS 
Dutch Criminal Code  
Article 23 - Sanctions 
Categories of fines for natural and legal persons 
(1) He who has been sentenced to a fine pays the determined amount to the state within the period set by Our Minister 
of Security and Justice. 
(2) The amount of the fine is at least € 3. 
(3) The maximum fine that may be imposed for a criminal offense is the amount of the category determined for that 
offense. 
(4) There are six categories: 
the first category, € 335 [Red: As of 1 January 2020: € 435.]; 
the second category, € 3 350 [Red: As of 1 January 2020: € 4,350.]; 
the third category, € 6,700 [Red: As of 1 January 2020: € 8,700.]; 
the fourth category, € 16 750 [Red: As of 1 January 2020: € 21,750.]; 
the fifth category, € 67,000 [Red: As of January 1, 2020: € 87,000.]; 
the sixth category, € 670,000 [Red: As of January 1, 2020: € 870,000.]. 
(5) For a violation or a crime, on which no fine has been imposed, a fine can be imposed up to the amount of the first 
or third category respectively. 
(6) For an offense or a crime, on which a fine has been imposed, but for which no category of fines has been 
determined, a fine may be imposed up to the amount of the first or third category respectively, if this amount is higher 
than the amount of the fine imposed on the offense concerned. 
(7) When a legal person is convicted, if the category of the fine determined for the fact does not allow for appropriate 
punishment, a fine may be imposed up to the amount of the next higher category. If a fine of the sixth category can 
be imposed for the fact and that fine category does not allow appropriate punishment, a fine may be imposed up to a 
maximum of ten percent of the annual turnover of the legal person in the financial year prior to the decision or 
sentence. 
(8) The previous paragraph applies mutatis mutandis when convicting a company without legal personality, 
partnership, shipping company or target capital. 
(9) The amounts referred to in the fourth paragraph are adjusted every two years, with effect from 1 January of a year, 
by order in council to the development of the consumer price index since the previous adjustment of these amounts. In 
this adjustment, the amount of money in the first category is rounded down to a multiple of € 5 and, assuming the 
amount of money in this first category and subject to the relationship between the amounts of the fine categories, the 
amounts of the second to and determined with the sixth fine category. 
Article 51 – Liability of legal persons 
(1) Criminal offenses can be committed by natural and legal persons. 
(2) If a criminal offense is committed by a legal person, criminal proceedings may be instituted and the penalties and 
measures provided for by law, if they are eligible, may be pronounced: 
1 °.against that legal person, or 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

108        
 
ANNEX 4: DIRECTIVE ON LARGE TRANSACTIONS (OFFICIAL 
TRANSLATION) 
Nature    : Directive pursuant to section 130, subsection 6 of the Judiciary (Organisation) Act 
From    : Board of Procurators General 
To    : Heads of the Public Prosecution Service  
     (OM) units 
Registration number : 2020A005 
Date of entry into force : 04-09-2020 
Publication in 
Government Gazette : Stcrt-2020-46166 
Replacing   : Directive on Large and Special Transactions  
Relevant OM  
administrative rules : Directive on Confiscation  (2016A009) 
Directive on Providing Information about Investigations and Prosecutions 
(2020A004) 
Legislative provisions: Articles 33, 74 and 74a, Criminal Code and section 36, Economic Offences Act 
(WED) 
Annexes    : - 
 
 
SUMMARY 
 
This Directive sets out the framework for offering large transactions. The term ‘large transactions” has now been 
defined more specifically and covers all transactions involving the payment to the State of a sum including a fine 
component of at least €200,000 and transactions with a total value of at least €1,000,000. The directive specifies the 
basic principles and procedural rules for offering transactions of this nature. The independent Large Transactions 
Review Committee is required to play an advisory role. If the Public Prosecution Service decides to offer a large 
transaction, it should, in principle, issue a press release. The directive contains general rules about the information to 
be included in a press release. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Criminal cases can be disposed of in different ways. If the public prosecutor believes the case can be proved, he may 
issue a writ of summons to the suspect so that the case may be adjudicated by a court, he may issue a penalty rather 
than taking the case to court or he may decide not to prosecute, conditionally or otherwise. In addition, the public 
prosecutor may opt to offer the suspect a transaction so as to avoid prosecution by fulfilling one or more conditions. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

110        
 
Procedure. Any such complaint must be lodged within three months of the date on which the interested party has 
become aware of the application of article 74 of the Criminal Code (article 12k of the Code of Criminal Procedure). 
Following an order to institute or continue prosecution, the transaction agreement is annulled and the sums involved 
in the transaction are repaid. 
 
3. LARGE TRANSACTIONS 
This Directive defines a transaction as large: 
a. if the sum set pursuant to article 74, paragraph 2 (a) of the Criminal Code (payment to the state of a sum of 
money) exceeds €200,000, 
unless: 
- in the case of a criminal offence where, according to its statutory definition, the sole principal penalty carried 
by the offence is a fine, the offender has offered – in accordance with the provisions of article 74a of the 
Criminal Code – to pay the maximum fine and to comply with all other conditions imposed pursuant to 
article 74, paragraph 2 of the Criminal Code,, 
- the penalty involves a fine or multiple fines deriving directly from sentencing guidelines adopted by the 
Board of Procurators General; 
b. if the total amount involved in the transaction is at least €1,000,000, including:  
- the value of monies or seized property paid or handed over to the state by the offender by way of deprivation of illegally 
obtained advantage, 
- the amount of damage for which compensation is payable, 
- the value of seized monies or property liable to be declared forfeit which are relinquished by the offender, 
- the value of monies or property which have not been seized and which are liable to be declared forfeit, which the offender 
submits or the estimated value of which is paid to the state. 
Consequently, transactions of over €1,000,000 without a fine component as referred to in article 74, paragraph 2 (a) of the 
Criminal Code are also regarded in this directive as large. 
 
4. BASIS FOR OFFERING A LARGE TRANSACTION  
First of all, the criteria that apply to all transactions also apply to decisions to offer a large transaction.  
• A transaction can be applied only in respect of minor offences and serious offences carrying a maximum sentence 
of imprisonment of six years (cf. article 74 of the Criminal Code). 
• A transaction can be applied only if there is sufficient evidence available and sufficient policy grounds to warrant 
committal for trial. 
• In choosing whether or not to prosecute, the Public Prosecution Service should make an autonomous assessment 
of the case on the basis of the rules of criminal procedure. 
• This assessment should explicitly take into account the interests of those involved, particularly those of the 
victims and injured parties. 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

112        
 
 
In the case of legal persons, natural persons may of course also be named as offenders. Penalties other than a fine may 
be imposed on natural persons, both by the Public Prosecution Service and by a court judgment. The basic principle 
is still that those who ordered the commission of the offence and those who had de facto control, as referred to in 
article 51 of the Criminal Code, are also prosecuted where possible. The case of each offender will be assessed on its 
own merits with a view to the decision whether or not to prosecute. The seriousness of the offences and the 
circumstances, including personal circumstances, will be taken into account. 
 
As regards compliance with the transaction agreement, external supervisory bodies may be called upon to assist. 
These include regional environmental enforcement agencies, De Nederlandsche Bank and the Data Protection 
Authority (Autoriteit Persoonsgegevens). Specific internal supervisory measures may also be agreed with offenders, 
such as the appointment of a compliance monitor. A legal person can also be instructed to report regularly to its 
supervisory board. 
 
5. PROCEDURE 
a. Approval by the chief public prosecutor 
Every time a public prosecutor considers disposing of a criminal case by offering a large transaction, he must 
submit this plan to the head of the public prosecutor’s office where he works. The proposal is then put before 
the Board of Procurators General for its approval. 
 
b. Advisory opinion of the Large Transactions Review Committee 
The Board then seeks the advice of the Large Transactions Review Committee. The reasoned transaction 
proposal, an account of the facts, including the applicable criminal law provisions, and a draft press release are 
enclosed with the request for an advisory opinion. On the basis of these documents, and having heard the head 
of the relevant public prosecutor’s office or his representative and the offender or his/its representative(s) and 
their lawyer, the Review Committee assesses whether, in view of all the circumstances of the case and having 
regard to the principles outlined in this directive, the proposal is an appropriate form of disposal which the Public 
Prosecution Service can reasonably decide to adopt. The review is thus a test of reasonableness. 
 
The Review Committee issues its advisory opinion to the Board of Procurators General. 
 
c. Decision by the Board of Procurators General  
If the Review Committee’s advisory opinion is positive, the Board of Procurators General takes it into account 
when deciding whether to offer the transaction proposal to the offender. If the Review Committee’s advisory 
opinion is negative, the case is handed over to the chief public prosecutor for a new decision on whether or not 
to prosecute. 
 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

114        
 
ANNEX 5: LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS, TERMS AND ACRONYMS  
AFM Dutch Authority for Financial Markets 
Department of International Affairs and Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters of the 
AIRS 
Ministry of Justice and Security 
AML Anti-Money Laundering 
AMLC FIOD’s Anti-Money Laundering Centre  
AWB General Administrative Law Act  
AWR General State Taxes Act (Algemene Wet inzake Rijksbelastingen) 
BES Bonaire, St. Eustatius and Saba 
Criminal Assets and Deprivation Bureau of the Public Prosecution Office (Bureau 
BOOM 
Ontnemingswetgeving Openbaar Ministerie) 
DCC Dutch Criminal Code (Wetboek van Strafrecht) 
DCPC Dutch Criminal Procedure Code  
DNB Dutch Central Bank (De Nederlandsche Bank) 
ECA Export Credit Agency 
EU European Union 
EUR Euro 
FDI Foreign Direct Investment 
Fiscal Intelligence and Investigation Service (Fiscale Inlichtingen en 
FIOD 
Opsporingsdienst) 
FIOD-
FIOD’s Anti-Corruption Centre 
ACC 
FIU Financial Intelligence Unit 
FMO Dutch Development Bank  
Office for Serious Fraud, Environmental Crime and Asset Confiscation, Public 
FP 
Prosecution Service (Functioneel Parket) 
FP-IRC FP’s International Legal Assistance Centre 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

116        
 
TCSP Trust or Company Service Provider 
TIOC FP’s Information and Operational Coordination Team 
UBO Ultimate Beneficial Owner 
UN United Nations 
US United States 
US DOJ United States Department of Justice 
USD US Dollar 
UTR Unusual Transaction Report 
VGBA Code of Conduct and Professional Practice for Accountants Regulation 
VOG Certificate of Conduct for natural persons (Verklaring Omtrent Gedrag) 
WAA Whistleblower Authority Act (Wet Huis voor Klokkenluiders)) 
WGB Working Group on Bribery in International Business Transactions 
Dutch Anti-Money Laundering and Counter Terrorism Financing Act (Wet ter 
Wwft 
voorkoming van witwassen en financieren van terrorisme) 
 
THE NETHERLANDS: PHASE 4 REPORT 
 

 

