Monitoring report progress Saba Package 2.0 
 
 
Text space to comment on the progress by the Public Entity and give a general view on 2023. 
 
 
Legenda 
 Implementation is going according to (finished by June 
’23, including comments/first results) 
 Implementation delayed (incl. comments) 
 Implementation stalled (incl. comments) 
 
 

Modernize social SZW • Preparation and • In the third quarter of 2022 stakeholders in the Caribbean Netherlands have been 
security system consultation for drawing consulted in order to provide input for shaping the arrangements. Based upon this 
up an unemployment input, the ministry of SZW will draw up a policy memorandum. 
scheme.  
• Preparing an arrangement  
in case an employee 
travels abroad with a sick 
relative/in the event of a 
medical referral. 
Reducing the  SZW/OCW • No specific realization for • The subsidies for child care have been increased in January 2022 with 10%, and in 
cost for childcare 2022 July 2022 again with 10%. With this extra subsidy child care organizations can 
enhance the quality of child care.  
• An additional subsidy has been granted for babies after child care organizations 
reported that the costs for care of babies were much higher than for toddlers.   
• The law proposal ‘Child care’ will be sent to the Parliament in the beginning of 
2023. The law proposal has been adjusted because of the ‘coalitieakkoord’ and the 
advice of de Raad van State. 
• As of 1 January 2023 the subsidies for childcare have been increased with 33,8% 
for the daycare and with 20% for the afterschool care. 
• The parental fee will decrease with $25 for the daycare and $10 for the afterschool 
care.  
• In 2022 OLS has continued to improve the quality of Childcare especially in the 
area of housing and education of staff. We have also reduced the cost for parents 
using childcare. 
Social workplace SZW, OLS • Funding towards OLS for • On 12 November, the Minister has signed a specific allowance (“bijzondere 
and initiatives for the social workplace (The uitkering”) to support the Public Entity of Saba on a number of initiatives in the 
those with a Garden). social domain, including the social workplace. 
distance to the • This action was completed. 
labor market 
Task ‘’bijzondere SZW, OLS • The Island Council • In the last Island Council meeting of 2022 this ordinance was approved. SZW and 
onderstand’’ approves the new Saba OLS will make an agreement on the transfer of the task three months after the 
ordinance. With that the publication of the ordinance. This includes the transfer of the budget and structural 
relevant SZW budget goes budget for capacity within the OLS. 
to OLS, together with 
budget for 1 extra fte at 
OLS to e.g. execute the 
extraordinary benefit).  
Poverty policy OLS, SZW • It is an ongoing activity • With the specific allowance, mentioned above, budget has also been made available 
to implement the to enable the Community Development Department to continue implementing the 
poverty policy (which poverty policy. 
was mentioned in the • This is an ongoing process. 
Saba Package 1.0).  
Execution is based on a 
mix of local and national 
budgets. 
3 
 

Master plan (early OLS, OCW • Renovation of the primary • Reorganized and reinforced Directorate of Infrastructure started working on the 
childhood) has school started, first programme of requirements for SCS, sufficient funding needs to be found` 
education related building will be finished May • Ongoing. OLS has started the expansion and renovation project of the primary school 
buildings 2023 for kindergarten classes. OLS also purchased property to start childcare housing in 
2023. 
Education and OCW, OLS Start implementing these • A collaboration within the hospitality-sector has been realized with NIPA. The 
labor market measures: collaboration aims to establish training for students and professionals. 
initiatives 1) Collaboration in hospitality  • A collaboration in education within the health domain has not yet been realized, it is 
2) Exchange programs for necessary to wait for the establishment of a consortium of mbo-schools in the European 
students, teachers  Netherlands. 
3)  Collaboration in education • ROA is responsible for the research. OLS is involved in this process. 
within the health domain  • With the above mentioned specific allowance, funding has been made available to the 
4) Boost vocational education Public Entity to strengthen its efforts to match labor market needs and potential, 
and education of assistant including by offering training to young people.  
teachers.  
5) Invest in stages.  
6) Skills Enhancement Program 
for the development of technical 
skills. 
Culture OLS • Culture policy plan agenda is • The culture policy plan has been completed and awaiting final approval through the 
drafted. Island Council and BC. 
 
Theme 2: Economic and spatial development 
4. Reducing the cost of doing business, diversifying the economy, sustaining tourism 
Action Saba Package Responsibility Planned realization 2022 Progress and comments 
2.0 
Decreasing price of EZK • Agreements between • EZK provides a subsidy to reduce the costs of fixed internet subscriptions for the end 
telecom telecom providers user. 
concerning passing on the • This is completed. Every month all customers receive a reduction in their cost.  
subsidy to customers. 
High level Task force FIN, JenV, EZK, • Start the Taskforce 
• The Taskforce has been up and running since October 2022. As requested by the public 
‘Solutions for Saba’s SZW, BZK en • Tangible results of the 
entities – who play a central part in taskforce - it has been working on the following 
high cost of doing zo nodig topics mentioned: 
topics:  
business’ andere • Banking service; 
1. BSN  
 partijen. • Notary; 
2. Postal Codes 
• Customs and 
3. Banking services 
brokers matters; 
4. Notarial serviecs 
• Immigration/border 
5. Competing claims on land 
control, IND and 
6. Economic diversification 
work permits 
7. Digitization  
issues; 
• Mail service, lack of 8. Work- and residence permits 
5 
 

Housing BZK/OLS Saba’s ambitions will be • The ‘Beleidsagenda’ has been be published in January 2023. To implement this policy 
implementation specified concretely and agenda, a steering group and task force will be created in 2023. The steering group will 
agenda measurably within the formulate an implementation framework in 2023, which offers ample space to further 
framework of the specify Saba’s ambitions for housing.    
‘Beleidsagenda • In 2022, BZK/VRO formulated the ‘Policy agenda housing and spatial development for 
Volkshuisvesting and the Caribbean Netherlands’. OLS provided input by means of: a position paper, 
Ruimtelijke Ordening Caribisch discussions during Minister De Jonge’s visit to the island in June 2022 and feedback on 
Nederland.’ The goal of this draft versions of the policy agenda. The policy agenda has been be presented end of 
agenda is to create the right January 2023. 
preconditions to make housing • Subsequently, OLS will translate the goals/ambitions mentioned in the policy agenda to 
more available and affordable.  an island-specific action plan with priorities and the right approach for Saba. 
 • Installation of the Rent Committee (Huurcommissie) has not taken place yet, but is one 
of the goals described in the policy agenda. 
BZK/VRO • OLS gives input for the • In the first half of 2022 we have explored the topics the spatial development program 
Spatial planning 
spatial planning should contain. The result of that was an outline that I have shared with the colleagues 
framework that BZK is on the islands. Saba reacted to that outline. 
working on • In 2022, BZK/VRO has initiated the process of establishing a spatial development 
programme for the Caribbean Netherlands. The spatial development programme 
relates to national interest in the field of spatial planning and covers all three islands. 
• As a first step, BZK outlined, with input of OLS, what this programme could entail. 
• In November 2022, Wolfs Company and Rho adviseurs were selected by BZK to draw 
up the spatial development programme. BZK has introduced OLS and the companies 
and the consultants presented the goals and planning of their assignment. 
• In January 2023 BZK/VRO and Rho adviseurs will visit Saba to discuss: the relevant 
spatial development themes on Saba; the desired role of the national government and 
how this should be included in the spatial development programme. 
• A first draft should be ready in April 2023, which will be presented and discussed on 
Saba. The final programme is expected to be presented in June 2023. 
• Subsequently, OLS will draw up a spatial development plan, specifically for Saba. 
Different OLS • Start with the bypass • The bypass road has currently been made into a working road for the school project.  
infrastructural road in St. Johns, road Ongoing progress  
projects maintenance, start with • Work on the grey jetter was pushed back to 2023, as it worked better with the events 
airport projects.  and other works planned for the harbor.  
• The connection of the generator room to the terminal building was being executed 
during the second half of 2022.  
• The update of the airport Master Plan was completed and now an action plan and the 
next steps have to be worked on.  
• Works on the Roads continue with the main project in the second half of 2022 being 
the widening of the road in Giles Quarter. 
 
 
Theme 3: Climate and Nature 
7 
 

over the next few months to intensify the removal of goats. An operational plan will be 
developed for the removal of the remaining 10 – 20% of goats to complete the project. This 
will take place after the March 15 Island Council elections. 
 
Hydroponics farm project 
The way forward with the hydroponics farm project is being fine-tuned to realize crop 
production in 2023. This is still being done within the scope of the plan on which the subsidy 
is based. 
 
Reforestation project 
The removal of 80 – 90% of the island’s roaming goat population is a precondition to the start 
of the reforestation project. This is being worked on. The OLS is searching for expertise to 
start up the project and is in touch with STENAPA in St. Eustatius, who already has a 
reforestation team. The OLS has also reached out to RVO to assist with finding expertise for 
more continuous assistance with the project. A component of this project is to plant fruit 
trees as a step toward increasing local food production. This will be carried out on the short 
term. 
 
Waste water vision/strategy 
The Ministry of I&W is working on a monitoring program to monitor the quality of the sea 
water at Saba’s coast for a waste water vision. The OLS will liaise with I&W to find the 
required expertise. I&W will visit Saba in March. 
 
Animal husbandry and fisheries pilot project 
A pilot project will be carried out for 6 months to assist livestock owners with the high costs 
of animal food and commercial fishermen with fishing materials. Here livestock owners and 
fishermen can request for reimbursement for shipping and ABB costs on imported products. A 
longer term for 3 years has been developed and will be submitted to the steering group for 
the NEPP for approval and then sent to the Ministry of LNV to request for financial support to 
execute it. Funding for this may come from the Fund for Agriculture and Fisher BES, which 
still falls within the NEPP budget. 
 
 Backyard farming pilot project 
A pilot project has been developed and will be carried out to support backyard farming. A 
online survey will be carried out to determine the needs of these farmers. Based on the 
results, solutions will be made available for a period of 6 months. For a longer term project, 
support can be provided in a broader sense and connected to the OLS horticulture master 
plan. 
 
Education and awareness plan 
The OLS is currently in talks with the Sea & Learn foundation to develop a tailor-made plan 
focused on education and awareness on nature conservation for the NEPP. This plan will be 
presented to the NEPP steering group for review and approval. 
 
 
9 
 

Improving public BZK, OLS en • No specific action for • Public safety updates on progress: 
order, enforcement JenV 2022  
and supervision In order to enforce public order and enforcement we have chosen two points of focus: invest 
in prevention and teach Sabans that actions have consequences: 
  
A team of 6 enforcers was established: two main enforcers and four part-time on harbor 
safety, environmental crimes, hygiene and building safety. 
  
Regarding prevention, Saba enforcers and Public Safety have held multi-disciplinary 
inspections of bars and restaurants and vendor stalls regarding fire safety, violations of the 
General Local Ordinance and Single Use Plastic Ban and hygiene. These inspections have led 
to 5 official warnings. Input has also been given for operational permits, firework permits and 
event permits. We have also warned owners of buildings at risk of (partly) blowing away 
during a hurricane. One structure was removed on public safety grounds and two building 
owners were given warnings regarding their building. 
  
Public Safety has also worked on the implementation of the new Traffic Ordinance, which was 
passed in May 2022. This traffic ordinance covers topics including tint, alcohol controls, 
helmets, child seats and handheld devices. 
  
On top of that, public safety has given advice in a number of policy domains including: food 
safety, immigration and border security, school bus safety, inhabitants causing nuisance and 
fire safety. 
  
On the topic of consequences, we have started at the main annoyance of the Saban people: 
parking troubles. Being blocked in, not finding a space to park, these are daily irritants on an 
island where space is scarce. We started slowly with verbal warnings. In the end 111 written 
warnings were issues (berisping) and 10 fines (process verbalen) were handed out. On top of 
that, 45 car wrecks were removed from the public road by their owners after formal enforcer 
warnings. One warning was handed out in the harbor regarding an oil spill.  
 
 
10. A modern, solid and employee empowering organization with robust public finances 
Action Saba Responsibility Planned realization 2022 Progress and comments 
Package 2.0 
Finances: BZK, OLS • All mentioned topics will be • (1) Completed. 
 started in 2022. Saba's  
Priorities governing begrotingstekort en beperkte • (2) In the process.  
agreement islands financiële reserves.  
tasks 1. Saba’s financial deficit and • (3) ongoing process. 
   
weak financial reserve 
Free allowance • (4) ongoing process 
position. 
  
2. A fund for low-income 
11 
 

