 
 
 
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the 
Budget for Kingdom Relations 
Part I:   emergency assistance on Saba, Sint Eustatius and 
     Sint Maarten (including early recovery in Sint  
     Maarten) 
Part III: reconstruction in Saba and Sint Eustatius 
Client: Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations (BZK) 
Rotterdam, 1 November 2022  
 
 
  
 
  

 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the 
Budget for Kingdom Relations 
 
Part I:   emergency assistance on Saba, Sint Eustatius and 
     Sint Maarten (including early recovery in Sint  
     Maarten) 
Part III: reconstruction in Saba and Sint Eustatius 
 
 
Client: Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations (BZK) 
 
 
Michel Briene 
Elvira Meurs 
Simone Snoeijenbos 
 
 
Rotterdam, 1 November 2022  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer 
 
The views expressed in this report are those of the evaluation team. They do not engage the 
Netherlands Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations (BZK) nor other parts of the 
Government of the Netherlands in any way. While an attempt has been made to take into 
consideration the views and perspectives of stakeholders consulted in the Netherlands, Saba, Sint 
Eustatius and Sint Maarten, the interpretation of this type of information, and all findings, 
conclusions and recommendations in this report are the exclusive responsibility of the authors. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Table of contents 
List of acronyms and abbreviations 9 
Summary 11 
1 Introduction 19 
1.1 Goal policy review 19 
1.2 Context and background 19 
1.3 Policy review of Article 8 of the Budget of Kingdom Relations 21 
1.4 Reading guide 23 
2 Methodology 24 
2.1 Intervention logic 24 
2.2 Evaluation questions 25 
2.3 Methods and limitation 26 
2.3.1 Documentation 26 
2.3.2 Interviews 28 
2.3.3 Visit to Sint Maarten, Saba and Sint Eustatius 29 
2.3.4 Triangulation of information 29 
2.3.5 Limitations and causality 29 
3 Design of the emergency response, early recovery and reconstruction activities 31 
3.1 Timeline 31 
3.2 Design of the emergency response 31 
3.2.1 Emergency response on Sint Maarten 31 
3.2.2 Emergency response on Saba and Sint Eustatius 33 
3.2.3 Constitutional differences 33 
3.2.4 Coordination between the islands after the hurricanes 34 
3.3 Design of the early recovery 36 
3.4 Design of the reconstruction of Saba and Sint Eustatius 37 
3.5 Financial overview Article 8 38 
3.6 Conclusions on the design 40 
4 Emergency response 43 
4.1 Introduction 43 
4.2 Damage assessment 43 
4.3 Requests for assistance 44 
4.4 Results achieved 48 
4.5 Effectiveness 56 
4.6 Efficiency 57 
4.7 Improvements to the emergency response after Irma 58 
4.8 Conclusions on emergency response 59 
5 Support for Early Recovery of Sint Maarten 62 
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 5 
 
   
 

 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 7 
 
   
 

 
List of acronyms and abbreviations 
ABB   Algemene Bestedings Belasting 
AMFO  Stichting Antilliaanse Medefinancieringsorganisatie 
BBB   Building Back Better  
BES   Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba  
COOC  Crisis Support Consultation Curaçao 
CoPI   Commando Plaats Incident   
COT  Crisis Onderzoeksteam (Institute for Security and Crisis Management)  
CRFF   Children’s Rights Film Festival  
CZMCARIB   Commandant der Zeemacht in het Caribisch Gebied 
DJI  Dienst Justitiële Inrichtingen  
EBT  Eilandelijk Beleids Team  
EOC  Emergency Operation Centre  
ESF  Emergency Support Function  
GEBE  St. Maarten Water and Energy Service Company   
GDP  Gross Domestic Product 
HUREX  Hurricane Exercise  
IAO  Interdepartmental Coordination Council  
ICCB  Interdepartmental Committee on Crisis Management 
IFV  Instituut Fysieke Veiligheid (Institute for Physical Safety) 
ISSN  International Standard Serial Number 
JUS    Ministery of Justice 
KDM   Karel Doorman (a multi-function support ship of the Royal Netherlands Navy) 
KMAR  Koninklijke Marechaussee 
KNVB  Royal Dutch Football Association 
KPSM   Korps Politie Sint Maarten 
MCCB  Ministerial Committee on Crisis Management 
MP CUR   Prime Minister of Curaçao 
NCTV  National Coordinator for the Fight Against Terrorism and for Security (Nationaal 
  Coördinator Terrorismebestrijding en Veiligheid) 
NDMP  St. Maarten’s National Disaster Management Plan  
NGO  Non-Governmental Organisations  
NIVRE  Nederlands Instituut Van Register Experts 
NL  Netherlands 
NRPB  National Recovery Program Bureau  
NLRC  Netherlands Red Cross 
NRRP  National Recovery and Resilience Plan  
OCJS   Ministery of Education, Culture, Youth and Sport  
PM  Prime Minister  
R4CR   Resources for Community Resilience   
RCN  Rijksdienst Caribisch Nederland 
RPE  Regeling periodiek evaluatieonderzoek 
RWS   Rijkswaterstaat  
SMDF  Sint Maarten Development Foundation 
SSCS   Saba, Statia Cable System  
STENAPA  Sint Eustatius National Parks Foundation 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 9 
 
   
 

 
Summary 
1 Policy review of Article 8 of the Kingdom Budget  
 
This policy review evaluates the activities for emergency assistance and reconstruction support 
provided by the Ministry of the Interior to the Windward Islands of Sint Maarten, Saba, and Sint 
1
Eustatius after Hurricanes Irma, José and Maria . It specifically focuses on the activities funded 
under Article 8 of the budget for Kingdom Relations. As policy review, it follows the structure and 
methodology of the Regulation of Periodical Evaluation Research (RPE) of the Government of the 
Netherlands. 
 
For analytical purposes, the full evaluation has been sub-divided into three parts: a) Part I: 
emergency assistance on all three islands (including early recovery in Sint Maarten) – Article 8.2.; 
b) Part II: reconstruction in Sint Maarten (both World Bank Trust Fund projects and direct support 
activities) – Article 8.1.; c) Part III: reconstruction in Saba and Sint Eustatius – Article 8.1. This 
report covers parts I and III. Part II (reconstruction in Sint Maarten) has been conducted by an 
independent evaluator. This evaluator will eventually also be responsible for a synthesis report 
covering the evaluation results of parts I/III and part II. 
 
 
2 Context and motivation of Dutch support  
 
The islands of Sint Maarten, Saba and Sint Eustatius have different constitutional statuses within 
the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The Charter of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, adopted on 10 
October 2010 and usually referred to as 10-10-10, granted Sint Maarten the status of an 
autonomous country within the Kingdom, along with Aruba, Curaçao and the Netherlands. Sint 
Maarten therefore has full autonomy in most areas, unless explicitly included in the provisions of 
the Charter of the Kingdom. Saba and Sint Eustatius, along with Bonaire, are public entities of the 
Netherlands and so the Government of the Netherlands exercises direct authority over these 
islands. These differences in the status of the three islands (and the resulting different relations with 
the Government of the Netherlands) resulted in different contexts for the provision of support to the 
islands under Article 8. 
 
Particularly relevant to a post-disaster scenario is Art. 36 of the Charter of the Kingdom, which 
stipulates that the countries of the Kingdom provide mutual support and assistance to each other. 
However, due to the autonomy of the parties within the Kingdom since 10-10-10, the understanding 
is that this type of support is typically provided upon an explicit request for assistance from the 
country.  
 
 
3 Hurricane Irma and the direct aftermath 
 
Hurricane Irma started out as a central Atlantic tropical storm which quickly gained strength as it 
moved westward. By the time it reached Sint Maarten on 6 September 2017, it had developed into 
a Category 5 Hurricane. The hurricane devasted the island and overwhelmed a population and 
 
1
  This report regularly refers only to Hurricane Irma, but in some cases this also refers to Hurricanes José and Maria. 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 11 
 
   
 

 
the lack of needs assessments, the list of goods and services to be provided was at first developed 
on the basis of mutual consultation and by proactively matching products to the flagged needs. 
There was also a need to begin the loading process quickly, as the ship (the Karel Doorman) would 
take two weeks to arrive in the Caribbean. This exercise resulted in a list containing an inventory to 
be provided via shipment from the Netherlands, that had been drawn up in response to statements 
by the various departments on Sint Maarten, and fed into by multiple stakeholders. This 
improvisation, unfortunately, led to cases of mismatch between what was needed and what was 
provided.  
 
In the case of Saba and Sint Eustatius, official requests for assistance had arrived earlier, before 
Hurricane Irma hit. These first requests for assistance related to the provision of military assistance. 
After Irma made landfall, the focus shifted to requests for assistance for aid aimed at providing 
acute emergency assistance (including requests for assistance of food and water and the 
evacuation of patients). The clear and timely requests for assistance ensured that support could be 
provided in a much more targeted way, particularly just after the hurricanes. 
 
The help and support provided during the emergency response phase was effective in the sense 
that almost all requests for assistance from the three islands were met. However, persons working 
on the side of The Hague did not always have the required expertise to gauge whether a request 
was borne out of the emergency situation or out of a structural problem. Furthermore, the 
effectiveness of the provided support would have greatly benefited from a more streamlined 
process, linking clear damage assessments to requests for assistance and ensuring better 
communication between those witnessing the situation on the island and those doing the 
processing of requests for assistance, particularly in the case of Sint Maarten. Several of these 
issues have now been addressed through improved communication. While Sint Maarten and The 
Hague did not used to have communication on requests for assistance, this is now done prior to 
each hurricane season.  
 
 
5 Longer-term needs and diverging approaches 
 
Longer-term reconstruction needs were also already being considered at an early stage, i.e. while 
emergency assistance was still under way. In the case of Saba and Sint Eustatius, their closer 
relation to the Ministries (due to their constitutional status) meant that support could be provided in 
a more direct manner. The case of Sint Maarten, however, followed a different approach – one 
upon which certain conditions were set.   
 
On 13 October 2017, a letter was addressed from the Ministry of BZK to the Government of Sint 
Maarten, announcing that a significant financial envelope could be made available for the 
reconstruction of the island, provided Sint Maarten gave its consent to two conditions, namely, (i) 
the establishment of an Integrity Chamber; and (ii) the strengthening of border control. Both 
conditions were stated by the Dutch government as essential for the support provided to benefit the 
population of Sint Maarten in a sustainable manner.  
 
The then Government of Sint Maarten did not approve these conditions at first, resulting in a 
collapse of the cabinet. In November 2017 a newly set-up caretaker Government consented to the 
conditions. The Government of the Netherlands then moved forward with the design of the Article 8-
funded reconstruction in Sint Maarten, the bulk of which was to be channelled through a World 
Bank executed Trust Fund, and a smaller part through direct support, which also included liquidity 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 13 
 
   
 

 
in a coordinating role for the activities of other ministries. The division of tasks between the 
ministries was not always clear during the reconstruction phase.  
The projects implemented on Saba and Sint Eustatius targeted damaged beyond those identified in 
the damage assessments reports post-Irma. Reconstruction was approached from the perspective 
of building back better and going beyond the repair of hurricane-induced damage by also making 
the islands more resilient for the future through maintenance and fortification. The erosion of the 
cliff in Sint Eustatius, for example, had already been discussed with the Ministry of BZK in 2016 – 
prior to the hurricane – and was taken on board as one of the projects under the reconstruction 
period.  
 
Sint Eustatius 
Sint Eustatius requested assistance for reconstruction efforts on 14 September 2017. The most 
affected areas were private homes (with over 100 personal homes damaged), businesses (with 
damaged infrastructure), utility companies (with power lines having been destroyed), island 
vegetation (with an estimated 80% damaged) and the agricultural sector. The reconstruction budget 
of BZK Article 8 for Sint Eustatius was €15 million. Just over €2.5 million was reserved for house 
repairs and rehabilitation of the public space, and nature and environment. 
 
The majority of the budget was spent on the stabilisation of the cliff supporting Fort Oranje (€11.6 
million). The project aimed to improve its stability and stop erosion for the next five decades – 
addressing both hurricane damage and deferred maintenance. The funds from the cliff, under the 
reconstruction, are part of the total reconstruction funds of the Ministry of BZK, but as a project it 
was independent and was not placed under the local reconstruction program. The cliff project was 
completed in May 2020. An inspection was carried out one year post-completion by 
RoyalHaskoning, which showed that the work carried out at the cliff was functioning as intended but 
would require upkeep, particularly of the vegetation covering it. 
 
A subsidy of just over €2.5 million was allocated to repair damaged buildings and public space, with 
a Dutch project manager assigned by the Ministry of BZK to coordinate and execute repairs. The 
project was successful and all 137 houses in the project were repaired before the end of 2019 and 
compliant with building procedures. The project manager worked together with a well-informed, 
equipped team in order to ensure timely implementation with the use of local constructors. 
 
A sum totalling €800,000 was allocated to projects in nature and environment, including agricultural 
recovery and water supply, coral restoration, recovery buoys and mooring system, restoration of the 
botanical garden, reforestation and recovery of breeding sea turtles. All projects met the 
expectations and finished according to the progress reports, which state that the latest projects 
were expected to be finished by the end of 2021.  
 
Saba 
Saba sent an estimation for needs for the reconstruction work and supporting measures to BZK on 
17 September. The overview included the airport, roads, buildings and steps for economic 
development. In total, the estimated funds required amounted to approximately US$10.8 million. 
Hurricane Maria caused additional damage on Saba, adding to the damage already caused by 
hurricane Irma. On 2 October, an additional cost estimation with regard to the damage from Maria 
was submitted. Project plans were submitted, and the Public Entity Saba received the 
reconstruction budget from the Ministry of BZK for a total of €3.8 million. The Public Entity 
delegated the construction works for the houses and public space to the Planning Bureau, which is 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 15 
 
   
 

 
Early recovery 
• Recommendation 6 There was a significant period of standstill between the article 8-funded 
social activities in the early recovery phase in Sint Maarten and the longer-term reconstruction 
activities to be financed from the World Bank Trust Fund. Action in future crises should ensure 
the continuity of social activities to support the most vulnerable of a population in the transition 
from emergence assistance to reconstruction activities. 
• Recommendation 7 Some of the more successful projects in the early recovery phase were 
those implemented by local NGOs or organisations with running activities that could be 
expanded with early recovery funds. Betting on local know-how proved successful, and should 
be kept in mind in future similar scenarios. 
 
Reconstruction of Sint Eustatius and Saba  
• Recommendation 8  The reconstruction projects were managed per ministry, which means 
that a clear overview is lacking and coordination between the various projects was made more 
difficult. It may be better to opt for a reconstruction programme for Saba and Sint Eustatius, like 
in Sint Maarten, with centralised management during the implementation phase. The 
coordinating role of the Ministry of BZK should be clarified and moved forward. 
• Recommendation 9 As the frequency and strength of hurricanes increases, it becomes 
increasingly important to prevent potential damage in the future by building back better.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 17 
 
   
 

 
1 Introduction 
1.1 Goal policy review   
Policy Review of Article 8 
1. This policy review is governed by provisions of the Regulation of Periodical Evaluation Research of 
the Government of the Netherlands of 15 March 2018. The overall review focuses on Article 8 of 
the budget for Kingdom Relations, describing funds reserved for emergency assistance and 
reconstruction of the Windward Islands of Sint Maarten, Saba, and Sint Eustatius.  
 
2. Policy reviews of this type follow standard evaluation questions. This particular review takes into 
account further development of the standard questions in the Letter by the Ministry of the Interior 
and Kingdom Relations (henceforth referred to as Ministry of BZK) to the House of Representatives 
of 21 September 2020 concerning the policy review of Article 8.  
 
3. For analytical purposes, the evaluation has been sub-divided into three parts: a) Part I: emergency 
assistance on all three islands (including early recovery in Sint Maarten) - Article 8.2.; b) Part II: 
reconstruction in Sint Maarten (both World Bank Trust Fund projects and direct support activities) – 
Article 8.1.; c) Part III: reconstruction in Saba and Sint Eustatius – Article 8.1. 
 
4. The present report only concerns the financial contributions under Article 8 for emergency 
assistance in 2017 on the three islands and early recovery activities in 2018 in Sint Maarten, as well 
as funds provided for reconstruction in Saba and Sint Eustatius in the wake of hurricane Irma, 
which struck the islands on 6 September 2017 (Part I and III). Reservations made for the 
reconstruction in Sint Maarten are reviewed in a separate report (Part II). Both reports will 
eventually feed into a synthesis report (composed by the evaluator of Part II) to be presented to 
Parliament in the Netherlands (for further details, see section 1.3). 
 
 
1.2 Context and background 
Hurricane Irma hit the islands Sint Maarten, Sint Eustatius and Saba 
5. The islands of Sint Maarten, Saba, and Sint Eustatius (part of the Windward Islands of the Lesser 
2
Antilles ) were hit by devastating hurricanes Irma, Jose and Maria in 2017. Sint Maarten was hit 
particularly hard by hurricane Irma, which struck on 6 September 2017.  
 
6. Around 90% of the physical infrastructure of the Dutch part of the island was destroyed, including 
50% of the housing stock and the majority of vital infrastructure such as the airport and port 
facilities. Drinking water supply and waste disposal procedures were disrupted, endangering public 
health. Emergency assistance was initially hampered by a breakdown of communication lines and 
information gathering and sharing, and also by a collapse of public order. The Government of the 
Netherlands provided immediate emergency assistance to Sint Maarten, as well as to the islands of 
Saba and Sint Eustatius, the latter two having been relatively spared by Hurricane Irma.  
 
 
2
  The report follows the tradition in Dutch to describe the islands of the Lesser Antilles north of Dominica as Windward 
Islands. This is the literal translation of the corresponding term in Dutch “Bovenwindse Eilanden”. In English, the islands 
north of Dominica, including Sint Maarten, Saba and Sint Eustatius, are usually described as “Leeward Islands”, whereas 
for the Lesser Antilles south of Dominica, the term “Windward Islands” is used. The Dutch linguistic preference is followed 
as the main audience of the report is in the Netherlands. 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 19 
 
   
 

 
essential projects to be initiated within a short time span and that could be expected to produce 
quick results in 2018. Towards the end of 2017, plans were made for funds designated for the 
reconstruction of the islands. Support provided to Saba and Sint Eustatius moved directly from 
emergency assistance to the financing of reconstruction activities – and did not include the early 
recovery phase used in Sint Maarten, because there was no need for a Trust Fund on these 
islands. For Saba and Sint Eustatius, a maximum of €67 million was reserved for reconstruction 
from the budgets of several departments, €18 million of which came from the budget of Article 8 
from the Ministry of BZK and €49 million from the budgets of other ministries. The budget and 
related activities from other ministries fall outside the scope of this policy review. For Sint Maarten, 
€550 million was reserved for the reconstruction, the majority of which was channelled through the 
7
Trust Fund of the World Bank.  
 
 
1.3 Policy review of Article 8 of the Budget of Kingdom Relations 
Article 8 of the Budget of Kingdom Relations 
11. Budgetary provisions under Art. 8 of the Budget of Kingdom Relations comprised a provision of €55 
million for emergency assistance in Sint Maarten, Saba, and Sint Eustatius (Art. 8.2.) and a 
provision of €550 million for reconstruction (including early recovery) in Sint Maarten, Saba and Sint 
Eustatius (Art. 8.1). A small portion of this budget (€7 million) was reserved for the early recovery in 
Sint Maarten. In total, €18 million was allocated from this budget for the reconstruction of Saba and 
Sint Eustatius. The remaining, and largest part of the budget, was allocated to the reconstruction of 
8
Sint Maarten.  
The actual disbursements of Article 8 were: €40.4 million for emergency assistance, €18 million for 
reconstruction in Saba and Sint Eustatius and €6.7 million for early recovery on Sint Maarten. All 
expenditures of the other Dutch ministries on emergency assistance went through Article 8 of the 
Budget of Kingdom Relations. For the reconstruction of Saba and St. Eustatius, other ministries 
also contributed through their own budget (i.e. outside Article 8).  
 
Objectives of the policy review 
12. According to the letter from the Minister of BZK to the House of Representatives, this policy review 
has two objectives: a) to assess the effectiveness and efficiency of Dutch spending under Article 8; 
and b) to assess the effectiveness and efficiency of institutional arrangements. Guidelines for such 
9
policy reviews of the Government of the Netherlands stipulate that effectiveness relates to the 
achievement of policy goals with given means (inputs), including human and financial resources, as 
well as activities and other instruments. The achievement of goals usually distinguishes between 
outputs (direct results and products), outcomes (higher level effects produced) and impact (ultimate 
societal effects). The same guidelines define efficiency as the relation between the effects of the 
policy (benefit) and financial and other resources mobilised for this policy (cost). The review of 
efficiency considers the question of how the optimum effect is achieved at the lowest possible cost, 
with the least possible undesirable side effects.  
 
Organisation of the overall review and activities to be evaluated 
13. For analytical purposes, the evaluation has been sub-divided into three parts:  
• Part I: emergency assistance on all three islands (including early recovery in Sint Maarten) - 
Article 8.2.  
 
7
  See for more detailed information: Policy Review Art. 8 Part II.  
8
  See for more detailed information: Policy Review Art. 8 Part II.  
9
  Handreiking beleidsdoorlichting, https://www.rijksbegroting.nl/beleidsevaluaties/evaluaties-en-
beleidsdoorlichtingen/handreiking, website consulted on 1 February 2022. 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 21 
 
   
 

 
 Activities falling under Article 8 – Within Activities related to emergency assistance 
scope /early recovery and reconstruction – Out of 
scope 
Ecorys • Reconstruction aid provided by local 
 government and private sector. 
 
The exclusive focus of the evaluation on effectiveness and efficiency of funding provided under 
Article 8 of the Budget of Kingdom Relations excludes consideration of other sources of funding for 
emergency assistance and reconstruction activities on the three islands. These include resources 
mobilized locally by local and national authorities, by the population, by the private sector, including 
proceeds from insurance coverage, as well as funding provided under other governmental and non-
governmental sources in the Kingdom. In methodological terms, this raises the question to what 
extent results achieved can be attributed to Article 8 funding, and also sheds a different light on the 
efficiency of inputs and activities. This policy review is therefore at best a contribution analysis, i.e., 
it can establish a reasonable attribution of results to or credible association with Article 8 funding. 
 
 
1.4 Reading guide    
15. Section 2 provides details on the methodology, the evaluation questions guiding the policy review, 
and the limitations. Section 3 explains the process of the design of the emergency response, early 
recovery and reconstruction of Saba and Sint Eustatius. A more detailed presentation of findings 
and conclusions follows in sections 4 to 6, both in terms of effectiveness (results achieved) and 
efficiency (costs and benefits). Section 4 focuses on the emergency response phase, Section 5 on 
the early recovery phase and Section 6 on the reconstruction phase on Sint Eustatius and Saba. 
Section 7 presents recommendations. 
 
16. An overview of consulted sources and a list of discussion partners is included in Annex I.  The 
terms of reference for this review are to be found in Annex II, and the Letter to Parliament guiding 
the terms of reference in Annex III.  The complete Evaluation Matrix with the Evaluation Questions 
(including references to specific sections in the report) is presented in Annex IV.  
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 23 
 
   
 

 
Figure 2.1 Intervention logic Budget Article 8  
 
 
2.2 Evaluation questions 
Policy review under the Regulation of Periodical Evaluation (RPE) Research 
20. The evaluation questions for this review closely follow the standard questions defined under the 
Regulation of Periodical Evaluation Research of the Government of the Netherlands of 15 March 
2018 and their further development in the Letter to the House of Representatives of 21 September 
2020. Annex IV contains all evaluation questions and references to specific sections in this report 
where they are answered. In some cases, complex questions covering multiple elements were 
disaggregated into sub-questions. 
 
General and specific evaluation questions RPE 
21. The general questions cover the structure of the funding; the motivation of the Government of the 
Netherlands to provide support; the respective responsibilities of the Governments of the 
Netherlands and Sint Maarten in the context of the Charter of the Kingdom; the scope of the 
evaluation; the funding provided and the expenditures that were made; the funding from other 
sources; and documentary and other evidence (including previous evaluations).  
 
22. More specific questions address the effectiveness of policy support in terms of results achieved, as 
well as possible positive or negative side-effects. Under effectiveness, the dimension of building 
back better is explored, namely the rebuilding of physical infrastructure; being better prepared for a 
crisis or better prepared through crisis management. Another set of questions addresses efficiency, 
particularly how expenses were justified; if they were reasonable in light of results achieved; and 
finally what policy options would exist if more or fewer resources (20% approx.) were available. 
 
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 25 
 
   
 

 
• Documentation related to emergency response, early recovery and reconstruction projects and 
programmes, e.g. if available, project documents; progress and final reports; minutes of 
meetings, as appropriate. 
11
• Other sources, e.g. scientific publications; archives of news media, as appropriate. 
 
Available documentation Emergency Response 
28. For the assessment of the emergency response phase, we used the (internal) evaluations carried 
out by the departments involved in the emergency response. Most of the departments involved in 
the emergency response conducted an (process) evaluation of their own input afterwards. The 
available (process) evaluations cover an important part of the resources used for emergency 
response. In addition, more general reviews have also been drawn up by a number of other 
organisations.  
 
29. The available reviews focused on the learning experiences and on what could be improved in the 
future; they focus much less on the effectiveness and efficiency of the emergency response 
provided. During the interviews, an attempt was made to obtain more information on the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the emergency assistance provided. 
 
Table 2.1 Main documents emergency response  
  
General • Instituut Fysieke Veiligheid (2018), Lessen uit crises en mini-crises 2017, 
Arnhem/ Zoetermeer.    
• COT: Instituut voor Veiligheids- en Crisismanagement (juli 2018), Evaluatie 
Nationale Crisisorganisatie Orkaan Irma, Rotterdam.   
Ministry of BZK • Ministerie van BZK (mei 2018), Sint Maarten, Irma en BZK: evaluatie 
crisisbeheer ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken, Den Haag. 
• Ministerie van BZK, Vertegenwoordiging van Nederland Willemstad (juli 
2018), Verslag “Lessons learned” van het Crisis Ondersteuningsoverleg Curaçao. 
Ministry of I&W • Instituut Fysieke Veiligheid (april 2018), Orkaan Irma treft Sint Maarten en 
Caribisch Nederland: een evaluatie van het door het ministerie van IenW 
geleverde Crisismanagement. Arnhem/ Zoetermeer.    
Ministry of • Ministerie van Defensie (mei 2020),  Evaluatie militaire inzet orkaan Irma 2017, 
Defence Den Haag. 
Ministry of VWS • No evaluation carried out specifically for VWS’ response. 
Ministry of JenV • Ministerie van Justitie en Veiligheid/ Inspectie Justitie en Veiligheid (mei 
2018), Onderzoek naar het Systeem van rampenbestrijding op de BES-eilanden. 
Incidentenonderzoek naar aanleiding van de passage van de orkanen Irma, Jose 
en Maria. Den Haag.    
Ministry of OCW • No evaluation carried out specifically for OCW’s response. 
Ministry of BZ • No evaluation carried out specifically for BZ’s response. 
 
 
Available documentation Early Recovery phase 
30. Due to the project-based nature of this phase, the activities are relatively well-documented. In 
addition to internal documents from the Ministry of BZK showing the discussions held in early 
December 2017, the evaluation team also received access to project proposals, progress reports 
and final reports for most projects. 
 
 
11
  For example, https://dossierkoninkrijksrelaties.nl/ , https://stmaartennews.com/, https://www.thedailyherald.sx/  website 
  consulted 30 June 2021, website consulted on 1 February 2022 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 27 
 
   
 

 
34. In advance of the respective appointments, semi-structured interview guides were shared with 
prospective resource persons. At the start of each interview, the evaluator clearly explained the 
scope and objectives of the policy review and the purpose of the interview. They also assured the 
interviewee of the confidentiality of their responses. This also included that any information and 
viewpoints shared with the evaluation team would not be attributed to individual respondents, both 
in the report and in general.  
 
 
2.3.3 Visit to Sint Maarten, Saba and Sint Eustatius 
 
35. Ecorys consultants and Lucien Bäck undertook a joint mission to Sint Maarten between 8 and 20 
November 2021. On 15 and 18 November, the Ecorys team was on Saba and Sint Eustatius, 
respectively. The Office of the Prime Minister of Sint Maarten kindly planned and facilitated 
meetings based on suggestions communicated in advance. The purpose of these meetings was for 
the evaluation team to gain information on results and context on the ground, and to hear 
viewpoints and perspectives of stakeholders in Sint Maarten. On Saba and Sint Eustatius, meetings 
and project visits were efficiently organised by the public entities, giving the team the opportunity to 
gather all necessary information in one day.  
 
36. Interviewees in Sint Maarten included technical staff of line ministries (e.g. the Ministry of 
Education), staff of the National Reconstruction Program Bureau (NRPB), the management team of 
the Sint Maarten Medical Centre, staff of implementing organisations of Trust Fund projects (e.g. 
VNG-International / R4CR, Red Cross Netherlands, UNICEF-NL, Qredits) as well as other NGOs. 
The team did not get to interview Members of Cabinet, despite requests to do so. Interviewees in 
Saba included the Saba Executive Council and Planning Bureau Department. In Sint Eustatius, a 
meeting was planned with the members of the crisis team, and reconstruction projects were also 
visited. 
 
 
2.3.4 Triangulation of information 
 
37. All available information was – to the greatest possible extent – triangulated, i.e. drawn from 
different sources, critically assessed and compared, with a view to drawing well-founded evidence-
based findings and reliable and credible conclusions. The review aimed at the greatest possible 
impartiality and objectivity, without bias, personal perspectives or viewpoints. Conclusions and 
recommendations are meant to be constructive and practical, to allow for an improvement of 
policies in the future. 
 
38. The evidence collected for this review is, by and large, sufficiently robust to allow for some 
meaningful conclusions and recommendations. However, the level of detail in the information 
available varied significantly across the phases, with the early recovery phase as a positive 
exception. Challenges to accessing and receiving the documentary, and other evidence on the 
emergency assistance and the reconstruction of Saba and Sint Maarten, were mostly overcome; 
but this did require a huge effort, and took more time than had been originally expected. 
 
2.3.5 Limitations and causality 
 
39. Several limitations need to be mentioned  
• In the first place, this policy review cannot draw on a proper results framework with specific, 
measurable, achievable and time-bound objectives concerning the Dutch contribution to the 
emergency assistance, early recovery and reconstruction on the islands.  
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 29 
 
   
 

 
3 Design of the emergency response, early 
recovery and reconstruction activities  
3.1 Timeline 
41. This policy review covers the period between 6 September 2017 and the end of 2021, and roughly 
follows the three phases below: 
• The Emergency Response phase spans from 7 September 2017 (when the Netherlands first 
sent emergency relief) to 1 December 2017 (the cut-off date set by the Ministry of BZK for 
12
emergency assistance to be invoiced by other departments under this budgetary line).   
• The Early Recovery phase spans from 21 December 2017 to mid-2018 and refers to the 
projects implemented in Sint Maarten as a result of a call for project proposals. The Netherlands 
began negotiations for the signing of the Trust Fund at an early stage, during a visit to 
Washington in October 2017 and ultimately signed the administration arrangement with the 
World Bank on 16 April, 2018. It will be in place until 2025 and is currently undergoing its mid-
term review under Part II.  An initial budget was earmarked for direct support, i.e. funding to be 
provided for activities implemented through bilateral cooperation between the Netherlands and 
Sint Maarten, without involvement of the World Bank.  
• The Reconstruction for Saba and Sint Eustatius period ran from 10 November 2017, when 
the Council of Ministers decided to provide financial support for recovery to the public entities, to 
31 December 2021.  
 
 
3.2 Design of the emergency response  
42. In this section, we describe how disaster management and emergency assistance is set up on the 
different islands. As Sint Maarten is an autonomous country within the Kingdom, it has been 
responsible for its national response to disasters since the administrative reforms of 2010, 
supported by the assurance that the four countries of the Kingdom can provide assistance to each 
other when needed (Article 36 of the Charter). Saba and Sint Eustatius, on the other hand, received 
the assistance they requested from the Netherlands as a result of their position as public entities of 
the country. 
 
 
3.2.1 Emergency response on Sint Maarten 
 
43. The disaster management system of Sint Maarten is laid down in the National Ordinance Disaster 
13
Management (“Landsverordening rampenbestrijding” ). This national ordinance highlights the 
duties and responsibilities in the event of a disaster. It also includes the obligation to draw up a 
contingency plan, which stipulates how to effectively act in the event of a disaster. 
 
44. The National Emergency Operation Centre (EOC) plays a central role within the disaster 
management structure of Sint Maarten (see Figure 3.1). The EOC is activated when a natural 
disaster approaches. This took place on 1 September 2017, five days before Hurricane Irma 
reached Sint Maarten. When the EOC is activated, the Prime Minister is elevated to a commanding 
 
12
  As coordinating ministry, the total budget was placed on the budget of BZK (Article 8). Ministries that were requested to 
help by the Ministry of BZK could then submit their invoices to the Ministry of BZK before 1 December 2017. 
13
  https://lokaleregelgeving.overheid.nl/CVDR206085 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 31 
 
   
 

 
3.2.2 Emergency response on Saba and Sint Eustatius 
 
46. The system for disaster management on Saba and Sint Eustatius is laid down in the BES Safety 
16
Act (Veiligheidswet BES). This law came into effect on 10 October 2010 and contains provisions 
on the police fire service, disaster relief and crisis management in the Caribbean Netherlands. The 
law stipulates that the Island Governors on Saba and Sint Eustatius play a central role, similarly to 
the role of a mayor in the municipalities within the Netherlands. The Island Governor has supreme 
command over his or her territory in the event of a disaster or crisis in that territory. The Island 
Governor is also charged with maintaining public order and crisis communication, and heads the 
Island (crisis) Policy Team (EBT in Dutch). External officials can also be brought in for this purpose. 
The role of island disaster coordinator is fulfilled by the Island Secretary. This person is the first 
point of contact for the provision of information and coordination of communication. When scaling 
up the crisis or disaster to the higher national level, the supreme command remains with the 
governor(s). In case of upscaling and assistance, the Kingdom Representative, stationed at 
17
Bonaire, acts as a link between the Caribbean Netherlands and the European Netherlands.  
 
 
3.2.3 Constitutional differences  
 
47. The disaster management systems on the islands are primarily intended for disasters with a local 
(island) scope. Due to the magnitude of damage caused by Hurricanes Irma, Jose and Maria – and 
the fact that all three islands were hit – it soon became clear that aid from the Netherlands was 
desired and necessary. The crisis management structure, therefore, needed to be upscaled.  
 
48. The position of the three islands in the constitutional structure (which defines Sint Maarten as an 
autonomous country within the Kingdom, and Saba and Sint Eustatius as public entities of the 
Netherlands) created an unclear situation for the Ministry of BZK. The Ministry is responsible for the 
coordination of a crisis in the Netherlands, but not for a crisis in an autonomous country of the 
Kingdom of the Netherlands. Consequently, an investigation had to be made into the legal grounds 
18
upon which the national crisis organisation could support Sint Maarten, which took some time. In 
the meantime, the Ministry of Defence was in charge of emergency assistance. Defence was 
already on site and prepared to act in crisis situations.. Within two weeks (formally from 18 
September 2017), the Ministry of BZK had taken over operational leadership and the chairmanship 
19
of Defence in meetings.  
 
49. Official requests for assistance are key for the provision of emergency assistance. Requests for 
assistance from Sint Maarten are made by invoking the Charter for Kingdom of the Netherlands 
(Article 36 the Netherlands, Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten provide each other with help and 
assistance). In contrast to Saba and Sint Eustatius, the official requests for needs and relief 
supplies from Sint Maarten only came later (starting from 12 September). The late submission of 
requests for assistance by the government of Sint Maarten came as a result of the management of 
the EOC not working properly in the beginning. In the face of the devastation on Sint Maarten and 
the threats to public law and order, the Netherlands took immediate action to respond to perceived 
emergency needs in some instances in a way that went beyond what was formally requested. The 
Ministry of Defence recognised that the decision to deploy additional military personnel (whereas 
initially 10 FTEs were requested, more were deployed) on Sint Maarten did not follow conventional 
 
16
  https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0028586/2018-08-01 
17
  Ministry of Justice and Security & Ministry of BZK, Handboek crisisbeheersing voor de Caribische delen van het Koninkrijk, 
Den Haag, June 2020. 
18
  COT: Insitiuut voor Veiligheids en Crisismanagement (juli 2018), Evaluatie Nationale Crisisorganisatie Orkaan Irma, 
Rotterdam (p.9).   
19
  Ministerie van Defensie (mei 2020),  Evaluatie militaire inzet orkaan Irma 2017, Den Haag (p. 16). 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 33 
 
   
 

 
 
53. In order to give substance to the coordinating role of the Ministry of BZK, a project director general 
“Reconstruction of the Windward Islands” was appointed two days after the islands were hit. Shortly 
afterwards, a crisis team was also set up in The Hague with the responsibility of coordinating the  
emergency assistance, including the matching of supply and demand. This crisis team consisted of 
the Ministerial Committee on Crisis Management (MCCB) and the Interdepartmental Committee on 
Crisis Management (ICCB) with representatives from, among others, the ministries of the Interior, 
Defence, Infrastructure and Water Management, Foreign Affairs and Justice and Security. A few 
days after the hurricane, a civil mission from BZK was also sent to Sint Maarten. The civil mission 
addressed urgent needs including waste disposal, water supply, electricity and immediate housing 
24
needs. The team also undertook a needs assessment and conveyed this to The Hague. The civil 
mission was active from 2 days after the hurricane until the end of November 2017. Communication 
between the civil mission in Sint Maarten and the coordinators in The Hague did not go smoothly at 
the start, in part because of the loss of crucial infrastructure and in part because processes, roles 
and responsibilities were still being figured out.  
 
54. The Caribbean part of the Kingdom had no existing joint structure or specific administrative plans in 
the event of a crisis. One exception is the role of the Ministry of Defence, which has a permanent 
presence in the Caribbean for military tasks – providing military assistance to local authorities, 
including the provision of emergency assistance.  Due to the lack of a specific approach, there was 
an immediate need for improvisation. To this end, the so-called Crisis Support Consultation 
25
Curaçao (COOC) was established on Curacao. The cooperation within the COOC was not based 
on the transfer of powers and mandate, but rather on added value, and was initially coordinated by 
the Commander NL Forces Caribbean (CZMCARIB). The meetings of the COOC covered a wide 
variety of topics. This resulted in lengthy meetings, which were neither efficient nor effective for all 
26
involved.  At a later stage, the coordination was taken over by the Representative of the 
Netherlands, as soon as the Representation of the Netherlands in Willemstad (VNW) was 
reinforced with personnel. 
 
55. A study carried out on behalf of the Ministry of JenV looked into the functioning of the existing 
disaster management systems on Saba and Sint Eustatius during the aftermath of Hurricanes Irma, 
Jose and Maria in. It concluded that while all separate parts of the disaster management system 
27 
were operational in 2017, there was a lack of coherence and coordination between these parts.
The report therefore found that the disaster management system on the BES islands did not yet 
fully function as intended in the BES Safety Act. 
 
56. Improvements were needed in relation to cooperation and coordination, in particular between the 
islands and the organisation between the European Netherlands and the Kingdom Representative. 
In addition to the difficulty of communication, the lack of knowledge of each party’s responsibilities 
and roles also played its part. For example, parties kept their own lists (of requested and provided 
assistance) and there was no clear central overview, as the study of the Ministry of JenV 
concluded. The issue of logistics was also mentioned, as with the exception of gathering an 
emergency stock, logistics is not included in the planning of Saba and Sint Eustatius in the event of 
disasters. Because logistic processes were mainly focused on Sint Maarten, Saba and Sint 
Eustatius became dependent on the relief goods that were delivered to Sint Maarten.  
 
 
24
  ABD Blad 4, donderdag 14 december 2017.  
25
  Ministry of Interior, Report “Lessons Learned of the Crisis Ondersteuningsoverleg Curaçao”, July 2018. 
26
  Verslag COOC.  
27
  Ministerie van Justitie en Veiligheid/ Inspectie Justitie en Veiligheid (mei 2018), Onderzoek naar het Systeem van 
rampenbestrijding op de BES-eilanden. Incidentenonderzoek naar  aanleiding van de passage van de orkanen Irma, Jose 
en Maria. Den Haag (p.5)    
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 35 
 
   
 

 
more practical projects needed to fill this gap. A similar phase was not developed for Saba and Sint 
Eustatius. Since the damage was not as extensive as in Sint Maarten, emergency assistance 
addressed many of their immediate needs. This more limited damage – and the position of the 
islands as public entities – also meant that reconstruction activities did not require the setting up of 
a Trust Fund as in the case of Sint Maarten, and were therefore able to be rolled out quicker, 
eliminating the need for a transition phase. 
 
60. Organisations invited to participate in the early recovery projects were seen as being best placed to 
identify urgent needs; using their own capacity to deliver results for the duration of the early 
recovery timeline. It emerges from the interviews with these organisations that they were given 
considerable freedom to develop their proposals, BZK assumed that these organisations 
understood the urgent needs well due to their local involvement or prior experience in disaster 
situations. Project proposals were submitted in December 2017 after a general call for proposals. In 
some cases, organisations were also approached directly by the Hague or the Dutch Civil Mission 
and asked to submit a proposal.  
 
61. The project proposals themselves were not subject to strict technical or financial requirements, 
though organisations did require an auditor’s report containing historical financial information to 
qualify. The development of the final project proposals often included rounds of discussion between 
33
the organisations and members of the Civil Mission. Final project proposals, which varied 
significantly in length and level of detail, contained a general description of the aim and the 
approach, as well as an initial cost estimate and breakdown. In practice, this meant that most of the 
projects had to further define or adapt their approach in the implementation phase (see Chapter 5), 
making it difficult to speak of effectiveness vis-à-vis changing targets.  
 
 
3.4 Design of the reconstruction of Saba and Sint Eustatius 
62. The damage on Saba and Sint Eustatius after the hurricanes was relatively limited compared to 
Sint Maarten; concerning mainly houses and public spaces. On 8 September 2017, two days after 
the hurricane, the Minister of BZK, R.H.A. Plasterk, indicated that Saba and Sint Eustatius would 
receive assistance in the reconstruction. On 12 September, Prime Minister Rutte again confirmed 
this. On 14 and 17 September 2017 respectively, Sint Eustatius and Saba requested assistance for 
34 35
the reconstruction of the island. , On 21 September, Minister R.H.A. Plasterk mentioned in 
“algemeen overleg” that “Sint Eustatius and Saba shall not be forgotten and are part of the recovery 
36
programme”. On 10 November 2017, the Council of Ministers made a formal decision to provide 
37
financial support to the public entities of Sint Eustatius and Saba for recovery. 
 
“In addition, the Council of Ministers has decided that a one-off amount of €67 million will be made 
available for the reconstruction of the public entities of Saba and Sint Eustatius. This amount is 
38
separate from the amount of €550 million destined for Sint Maarten.”  
 
 
33
  The evaluators had access to the e-mails containing project proposals submissions, for both selected and not selected 
projects. From these e-mails it was clear that conversations about the objectives of projects and ideas on how to achieve 
them had, in many cases, already taken place. 
34
  Rijksvertegenwoordiger voor Bonaire, Sint Eustatius en Saba. Brief aan minister Plasterk met het verzoek om bijstand 
wederopbouw.14 september 2017. Kenmerk Rv/17u/106. 
35
  Public Entity of Saba. Overview of all measures requested. 15 november 2017. 
36
  Tweede Kamer der Staten-Generaal. Verslag van een algemeen overleg. 21 september 2017. 
37
  Tweede Kamer der Staten-Generaal. Brief van de staatssecretaris van binnenlandse zaken en koninkrijksrelaties. 
Vergaderjaar 2017-2018. Kenmerk: 34 773. 10 november 2017. 
38
  Kamerbrief van 10 november 2017 (kst-34773-D, ISSN 0921 – 7371, ’s-Gravenhage 2017) 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 37 
 
   
 

 
Table 3.1 Expenditures on emergency response, early recovery and reconstruction on Article 8.2  
(in € x 1.000) 
 
Budgeted Realisation  
Emergency response 55.0 40.4 
Early recovery 7.0 6.7 a) 
Reconstruction    20.4 
 Saba b) 3.9 
Sint Eustatius  b) 15.0 
Subsidy SSCS Sea cable b) 1.5 
Total   62 + b) 67.5 
a) Source: Financieel overzicht WBE SXM 15072021 
b) Initial budget not known – not provided in the documentation 
 
Establishment of the budgets 
68. In the emergency phase, an inventory was created of what was needed and how much it would 
cost during implementation. The total amount of estimated costs was the budget for the emergency 
response. The budget was included in the regular treatment of the 2nd supplementary bill. 
 
69. The establishment of the budget for the early recovery is closely related with the decision to spend 
a large portion of the envelope of €550 million through a World Bank executed Trust Fund in Sint 
Maarten. This decision was made rather quickly at political level in the Netherlands in November 
2017 (see also Part II of the policy review). The expediency observed by both the Government of 
the Netherlands and the World Bank in establishing the Trust Fund created the impression that 
project activities would commence rapidly after signature of the Administration Arrangement, thus  
responding to the needs of the population on the ground within a short timeframe. The Government 
of the Netherlands was apparently under this impression as well, as the intended early recovery 
phase involved only a comparatively small fund of €7 million.  
 
70. After the emergency response phase, all departments assumed their own responsibilities for the 
reconstruction of Saba and Sint Eustatius. During the interviews, the team heard that the authorities 
on the islands could propose reconstruction projects themselves, in consultation with the line 
ministries. The cost estimates of these projects added up to the reconstruction budget. The Ministry 
of BZK was, among others, responsible for house repairs and repairs in public space (including the 
stabilisation of the cliff). The budget of this phase was mainly based on damage assessment 
reports.  
 
Activities with a lower or higher budget 
71. A policy review also looks at policy options in the case of a 20% higher or 20% lower budget. In a 
crisis situation this question poses some challenges. For both the emergency relief and the early 
recovery phase, the size of the budget was a political decision. One could also have decided that 
less aid should be granted for the Caribbean part of the Kingdom. After all, there is no provision in 
the Statute of the Kingdom concerning how much assistance must be provided. However, given the 
nature of the disaster and the suffering it caused, the political decision was made in an early phase 
to be generous. 
 
72. If there was actually 20% less budget available  for support in a similar subsequent disaster, fewer 
requests for assistance could be approved in the emergency response phase. Good prioritisation is 
necessary here. In the case of the early recovery phase in Sint Maarten, our findings show that 
several projects went over budget as a result of underestimations, or requested extensions to 
continue meetings a segment of the population’s needs. Lower budgets would have resulted in 
shorter projects with less impact. As regards the reconstruction of Saba and Sint Eustatius, the 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 39 
 
   
 

 
77. Although the Netherlands had a national crisis structure, it was not specifically prepared to manage 
a crisis in the Caribbean part of the Kingdom, or to organise emergency assistance for an 
autonomous country inside the Kingdom of the Netherlands. It was therefore initially unclear on the 
42
Dutch side as to which ministry was responsible. In the event of a disaster or crisis in the 
Netherlands, the Ministry of JenV usually takes responsibility. In the case of Irma, it seemed most 
obvious that the Ministry of BZK would take on the coordination of the relief effort. The evaluation 
by the Ministry of BZK of its own role shows that it was underprepared for this role and therefore 
43
had to improvise (out of necessity).  
 
78. The “Crisis Management Handbook for the Caribbean parts of the Kingdom” was drawn up in 2020 
to provide more clarity about the division of tasks and responsibilities and applies if the Caribbean 
parts of the Kingdom are hit by a disaster or crisis and assistance is offered from the European 
Netherlands and addresses the types of agreements on cooperation and implementation that were 
not clear in the aftermath of Hurricane Irma. The manual cannot be viewed in isolation from its 
practical application. The handbook does not discuss the preparation phase because this 
preparation is the responsibility of the individual countries within the Kingdom. 
 
79. Although Sint Maarten, as an autonomous country within the Kingdom, is responsible for its own 
control and assistance in a crisis scenario, it turned out that the management of the EOC by the 
Prime Minister of Sint Maarten was weak. In addition, there were ambiguities regarding the division 
of tasks and responsibilities between the ESFs. As a result, the counterpart of BZK on the island 
was also lacking proper coordination. Consequently, the flow of information was inadequate and 
prioritisation was difficult on the Dutch side. Action was therefore carried out in the initial days after 
Irma based on an estimate (push) – not demand-driven from the islands (pull). Although the effects 
44
of the hurricanes were quickly combated, it was not due to the proper functioning of the system. A 
supra-island coordination point or coordination team is not included in supra-island plans, national 
plans or arranged in another way.  
 
 
 
  
 
42
  Instituut Fysieke Veiligheid (2018), Lessen uit crises en mini crises 2017, Arnhem/ Zoetermeer.    
43
  Ministerie van BZK (mei 2018), Sint Maarten, Irma en BZK: evaluatie crisisbeheer ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken 
44
  Ministerie van JenV (mei 2018), Onderzoek naar het system van de rampenbestrijding op de BES-eilanden. 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 41 
 
   
 

 
4 Emergency response 
4.1 Introduction 
80. This section discusses the emergency response phase in more detail. This phase commenced 
shortly before Hurricane Irma hit the islands on 6 September and formally ended on 1 December, 
2017. The emergency response was an immediate humanitarian emergency response for the three 
islands in the period after the disaster – consisting of the provision of security, health care, drinking 
water, etc. based on requests for assistance. The goal of this first phase was to meet the first needs 
of the islands' population.   
 
81. Section 4.2 initially discusses the way in which the emergency response phase was implemented in 
practice, to provide context. Subsequently, sections 4.3 and 4.4 take a closer look at the requests 
for assistance and the emergency assistance provided, as well as the activities undertaken. 
Effectiveness and efficiency are discussed in sections 4.5 and 4.6, respectively. The chapter ends 
with a section on conclusions.  
 
 
4.2 Damage assessment 
Initial damage assessments  
82. In the days after Hurricane Irma hit, several damage assessments were carried out by, among 
others, Defence, the media, NGOs and local people. All these damage assessments together 
formed a picture of the situation on the islands. In a Letter to the Parliament dated 8 September 
2017 (kst-34773-1, ISSN 0921 - 7371, 's-Gravenhage 2017), the extent of the damage caused by 
Irma was described to the parliament:    
 
83. Sint Maarten  
“Sint Maarten has seen widespread destruction of infrastructure, houses and businesses. Many residents 
have become homeless. The provision of emergency aid has encountered challenges, mainly due to the 
island’s limited connectivity. This also makes it difficult to support the local government. Basic supplies are 
limited. There is no electricity, no petrol, no running water and communication is difficult. There is also talk 
of looting and other public order disturbances. 
 
The current priorities lie in providing water and food and public order assistance, and in restoring the 
infrastructure needed to deliver relief supplies. Utmost efforts are being carried out to urgently pick up  
patients in Sint Maarten who are in critical condition. Defence aircraft and ambulance helicopters have 
been deployed from Sint Eustatius for this purpose.”  
 
84. Saba en Sint Eustatius  
“There have been no fatalities or serious injuries on Saba. The Island Governor of Saba, Mr. Johnson, has 
indicated that the infrastructure (i.e. roads, airport and seaport) appears to be intact, but that there has 
been material damage to the houses. The soldiers present on the island are currently aiding the people of 
Saba’s first recovery efforts. Information supplied by the acting Island Governor of Sint Eustatius, Mr. 
Woodley, confirms that there have been no fatalities or serious injuries on Sint Eustatius either. There has 
however been significant damage to houses and the natural environment. The electricity supply lines that 
have been affected are currently being rebuilt. The seaport and airport are operational but not operating at 
full capacity. 
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 43 
 
   
 

 
 
89. On both islands, the majority of requests for assistance were honoured. The rejected requests for 
assistance were mostly rejected on the basis of their nature felling outside the stated definition of 
emergency response, being more related to reconstruction. At a later stage, these requests of 
assistance were honoured as part of the reconstruction phase. 
 
Sint Maarten  
90. The Governor of Sint Maarten addressed a formal request for assistance to the Netherlands 
Ministry of Defence on 4 September 2017, when it became clear that the island would be impacted 
by Hurricane Irma. The Ministry of Defence was best prepared to offer immediate emergency 
support and also had the advantage of being present in the region. Initial assistance was to 
comprise setting up shelters, damage assessments and maintaining public law and order. Military 
staff and equipment were expedited  from Curaçao on 3 September and arrived in Sint Maarten on 
5 September 2017. The initial mandate was to expire on 10 September, but it was extended until 
45
further order by another request emanating from the Governor on 8 September 2017 . 
Because timely assessments of needs from Sint Maarten were not initially forthcoming, the request 
for needs on 12 Sept were decided on the basis of mutual consultation and logical reasoning. The 
so-called "Navy Ship List of needs Government Sint Maarten" played an important role in the 
response. This list contained an inventory that was drawn up in response to statements by the 
various departments on Sint Maarten. Because the departments on Sint Maarten could not agree 
on a definitive list, the Netherlands made its own choices on emergency relief supplies based on a 
judgement of urgency. These choices were necessary because of the limited available cargo space 
on the Karel Doorman, the ship that departed from the Netherlands with relief supplies and because 
the two-week sailing time from the Netherlands to Sint Maarten meant the goods had to be shipped 
out as soon as possible. Cargo space on the Karel Doorman was also reserved for UK emergency 
relief supplies destined to Dominica.  
 
Table 4.1 Overview requests for assistance Sint Maarten 
Date  Sint Maarten request Details Department Response 
4 Sept The Governor of Sint Maarten Initial assistance was to comprise setting up shelters, Defence Yes 
addressed a formal request for damage assessments and maintaining public law and 
assistance to the Netherlands order. 
Ministry of Defence 
12 Sept. Technical assistance for the Evacuation according to the following order of MP CUR Via 
reception and transit of evacuees to priorities: Curacao. 
their home country. 1. Due to medical necessity (applying to all 
-Prioritization for the evaluation of nationalities); 
people in Sint Maarten (not being 2. Families of military personnel, aid workers and 
permanent residents). other personnel involved in providing emergency aid; 
-Financial resources needed for the 3. Tourists (applies to all nationalities); and 
reception and transit of these people.   4. Temporary residents (such as interns, consultants, 
etc. of all nationalities).  
16 Sept Navy Ship List of Needs of the TEATT-MET/Civil aviation office, JUS, VSA, VROMI, BZK/ I&M Requested 
Government of Sint Maarten, later TelEm en OCJS goods 
also referred to as the “Wishlist”.  partly 
 delivered. 
21 Sept. Extra support for ambulance Ambulance service: 5 drivers, 5 nurses and 5 VWS 3 teams 
services.  dispatchers.  supported 
during 3 
weeks. 
21 Sept. Material and support to set up a The “waste train” required:  BZK No 
“waste train”. • 3 Bob Cats for picking up the waste; information. 
•1 garbage truck for processing and covering the 
waste; 
• 1 “suction spray lance car; 
• Sufficient overalls, gloves, shovels and brooms; 
• Sufficient chloride and quicklime. 
The request also asked for an advisor to guide the 
process and train the staff to run the train. 
25 Sept. Temporary transfer of detainees from Transfer of 9 detainees. V&J Yes 
Sint Maarten to the Netherlands. 
1 Oct. Police assistance. Caribbean police assistance to KPSM (from 1-10 to BZK/ V&J Yes 
1-11 /30 fte) (1-11 to 5-1 /10 fte) +59 fte from NL 
(concerning extension) 
 
45
 The respective correspondence was made available to the evaluators by the Ministry of Defence. 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 45 
 
   
 

 
Date  Saba request Details Department Response 
19 Sept. Support UNICEF though Request to UNICEF on support staff to: BZK Yes 
psychosocial support in schools. 1. Support schools, out-of-school care and childcare. 
Pedagogically trained with knowledge of the region. 
2. Support social work. 
3. Support activities for the youth on Saba. 
 
21 Sept. Logistical supply of drinking water Water and food for approximately 2200 people. BZK Yes 
and food. 
 New supply routes/contacts New supply routes through contacts on other islands. BZK Yes 
islands. 
22 Sept. Personnel support logistics One medical logistics coordinator. BZK No 
information 
found. 
27 Sept. Supplement building materials. Requests for: BZK Yes 
- 1000 pieces of 2"" x 4""- 16' 
- 200 sheets of 3/4"" plywood 
- 180 sheets of T1 - 11; Thickness of 5/8"" 
- 256 pieces of 2"" x 6"" - 16' 
- 80 pieces of 3"" x 6"" - 16' 
 
2 Oct. Improving the accessibility of Increase the accessibility of Saba by air in addition to BZK Yes 
Saba, in particular the transport increasing the accessibility of Saba by sea. 
options for people and goods by air  
and/or by sea.  
  Set up temporary flight routes between the islands I&M Yes 
13 Oct. Additional machinery. - Chainsaws; BZK Yes 
- Small car with elevator function (to repair street lights); 
- Extra truck with open body and tail lift; 
- A motor-driven concrete mixer with wheels; 
- A wood chipper (€ 77,000) for processing tree stumps. 
17 Oct. Contribution to disaster relief costs. According to Saba, hurricanes Irma and Maria fall BZK/  Yes 
under the definition of a disaster according to the BES VenJ 
Safety Act. Request for all costs incurred through a 
contribution based on Article 70 of the BES Safety Act 
in conjunction with art. 4 to reimburse the costs of the 
BES Safety Act. Total costs incurred: $894,768.92. 
In view of the limited financial resources of all 
organisations involved, request for a quick decision. 
The Executive Council is the recipient of the 
contribution;  
19 Oct. Funding for the Disaster Recovery Damage to landfill and recycling factory. Financial BZK No, not 
of the Landfill and Recycling Plant assistance for the emergency repair of garbage considered 
disposal $ 969,600 (Facade walls, roll up doors, ramps, emergency 
inspection (replacement and repair of damaged aid. 
equipment). 
26 Oct. Financial coverage for emergency Total amount $1,285,863 BZK Yes. 
aid measures - Excl. deployment of extra staff 
- Building material $135,863 
- Debris removal weighing $190,000 
- Road repairs $70,000 
- Temporary Housing $180,000, Port Relief $500,000, 
Water Plants $200,000, Primary Necessities $10,000 
6 Nov. Financial resources labour costs Financial assistance for labour costs amounting to BZK Yes, partly. 
$2,500,000 for the repair of the buildings. 
 
 
Table 4.3 Overview requests Sint Eustatius  
Date  Saba request Details Department Response 
1 Sept. Military support. Assistance by the armed forces, including the LNO Defence Yes 
team, pursuant to Article 7, paragraph 1 of the BES 
Security Act. 8 soldiers for the duration of 14 days 
10 Sept. Extension liaison defence.  Defence Yes 
10 Sept. Logistical supply of drinking water Full list attached to the request. BZK Yes 
and food. 
10 Sept. Stabilisation cliff.  List of cliff reinforcement supplies. BZK Yes 
14 Sept. Support in the medium and long Full list included with the request.  BZK To be 
term in the reconstruction of Sint supplied from 
Eustatius. Curacao.  
17 Sept. Military assistance Sint Eustatius On September 12 (reference: BS2017028076) the Defence Yes 
deployment of units of the CZMCARIB was approved 
(until further notice) during and after the passage of 
hurricanes Irma and Jose. It is requested that this 
support on Saba also be used for Maria. It is also 
requested to deploy comparable support on St. 
Eustatius until further notice. 
18 Sept. Crisis management / additional Full list in dossier folder. BZK Yes, 
building material. purchasing 
through 
Curacao. 
29 Sept. Expert staff for cliff fencing. Placing these fences requires specific expertise, which BZK Yes 
the island does not have. Costs amount to €112.500 
excluding VAT. 
17 Oct. Shelter 12 families, with Statian 12 container homes, 1 mobile kitchen, 2 manual Jack BZK Yes 
background from Sint Maarten Forklifts, 15 first aid tool kits 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 47 
 
   
 

 
47
emergency assistance ended on 29 October, the Ministry of BZK then took over this 
responsibility. 
 
Table 4.4 Projects emergency response (Ministry of Defence) 
Projects Expenses (x € Output Results  
1000) 
Hire air transport 3.834 More than 4,000 people Help to inhabitants in 
Airline tickets 446 were evacuated from critical condition. 
Sint Maarten, of which   
Use of your own aircraft 3.639 
1,608 by the Dutch 
armed forces. 
Deployment ships 3.405 Supply and ddeisptloyribumentiont         Distribution of food, 
of ships Pelikaan and care products and other 
Zeeland from Curaçao. emergency supplies on 
 the island 
The Karel Doorman was 
primarily used for sea 
transport (from the 
Netherlands) of 
equipment and relief 
supplies. 
Communication and 815  Restored 
connections  Assistance with repair    communication lines, 
and clean-up work clean-up activities and 
Hire vehicles  160 
make infrastructure 
Construction materials 457 
usable again 
Food and water 1.119 Transport from Curaçao Provision of food and 
of food, water and water and medical 
Medical articles  100 
medical material to Sint articles to inhabitants in 
Maarten. critical condition 
Personnel care/aftercare 245 Dutch soldiers support  
Ammunition  56 the local authorities, for  
example in maintaining  
Clothing and personal 344 
public order and safety, Assistance in 
equipment 
but also in the maintaining law and 
distribution of food and order 
water. The soldiers 
were also deployed for 
recovery and clean-up 
work 
Other 2.216   
Total 16.836   
Source: Submitted invoices (dd. 11 October, 24 November and 13 December of 2017) of the Ministry of Defence  
a) The sum of the amounts on the 3 invoices does not match the total amount. Therefore, a residual item has been included 
in the table. 
 
48
97. An evaluation carried out on the military effort during Hurricane Irma concluded that the Ministry 
of Defence can provide added value in the field of emergency assistance and humanitarian aid. The 
 
47
 Ministerie van Defensie (mei 2020), Evaluatie militaire inzet orkaan Irma 2017, Den Haag (p. 7). 
48
 Ministerie van Defensie (mei 2020),  Evaluatie militaire inzet orkaan Irma 2017, Den Haag (p. 30). 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 49 
 
   
 

 
Projects Expenses (x € 1000) Output Results 
Waste disposal  
Waste Disposal 1.288 
contribution Restoration of critical 
St Maarten Airport Access 1.900 infrastructure 
required for the 
Mateo package and 
delivery of relief 
personnel deployment  333 
Restore infrastructure and 
supplies; 
Dredging and making 
make islands accessible 
harbour Saba breakbeat 900 
again 
accessible 
St Eustatius repair seawall 
700 
dams 
Better coordination and 
Communication tools 89 
consultation 
Total 6.350   
Source: Inventarisatie kosten noodhulp Ministry of IenW (17 November 2017) 
 
100. Commissioned by the Ministry of IenW, IFV (Institute for Physical Safety) carried out an evaluation 
50
of IenW’s performance in 2018. This evaluation showed that the Ministry of IenW was more 
focused on Saba and Sint Eustatius, as it was more familiar with working with overseas public 
entities. The Ministry of IenW had less of a track record working in and with Sint Maarten and had 
not previously considered that it may have to act in an autonomous country within the Kingdom in 
the case of a crisis. It therefore needed to improvise when it came to its procedures for taking 
action in Sint Maarten, and it took several days before they got a clear picture of the damage done 
through a proper damage assessment. Based on this, the Ministry of IenW then set to work and the 
airport, seaport and later, drinking water supply, were given priority. 
 
101. In the execution, the distance and time difference between the Netherlands and the islands were 
challenging. The evaluation also points to problems with the delivery of the necessary 
miscellaneous goods and materials needed to carry out the emergency repairs. Finally, there was 
some ambiguity – and discussions took place between the party responsible for the submission of 
the request for assistance and the responsible department– about the definition of emergency 
assistance and reconstruction.  
 
Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport (VWS) 
102. The evacuation of medical emergency patients from Sint Maarten, Sint Eustatius and Saba was 
completed shortly after Hurricane Irma hit. This included patients who required kidney dialysis, and 
people who just had an operation. On 8 September 2017, 35 kidney dialysis patients were 
transported from Sint Maarten to Aruba and Bonaire. The remaining 28 kidney dialysis patients and 
51
wounded were evacuated to Curacao and Aruba on 9 September 2017.  The total expenditure on 
emergency assistance for VWS amounted to €1.68 million. This amount is specified in the following 
table. 
 
Table 4.7 Projects emergency response (Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport) 
Projects Expenses (x € Output Results 
1000) 
Transport patients 270  
 
50
  Institute for Physical Safety (April 2018), Hurricane Irma affects Sint Maarten and the Caribbean Netherlands: an 
evaluation of the Crisis Management provided by the Ministry of Infrastructure and Water Management, Arnhem/ 
Zoetermeer. 
51
  COT: Insitiuut voor Veiligheids en Crisismanagement (juli 2018), Evaluatie Nationale Crisisorganisatie Orkaan Irma, 
Rotterdam (p. 24).   
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 51 
 
   
 

 
Projects Expenses Output Results 
(x € 1000) 
Kostenbesluit Veiligheidswet 761   
BES (including extra staff and Deployment of extra Assist emergency services 
hiring private staff) staff  on the islands  
Police deployment 2.614 
Deployment of fire brigade 129 
Total 5.453   
 
56
The evaluation of the Ministry of BZK states that the prison of Sint Maarten had been seriously 
damaged because of Irma. However, the evacuation of 64 prisoners did not take place until after 
the emergency response phase, when the request for assistance came through. 
 
104. Commissioned by the Ministry of JenV, the Justice and Security Inspectorate evaluated whether the 
system of disaster management on the BES islands was adequate. However, the aforementioned 
evaluation does not explicitly address the specific activities from the table above, which were 
performed by the Ministry of JenV, in the context of emergency assistance. In a more general 
sense, the evaluation noted the vulnerability of the logistic system and the dependence on logistics 
facilities on Sint Maarten. This also made it difficult to organise the evacuation of prisoners. 
 
Ministry of Education, Culture and Science (OCW) 
105. Hurricane Irma also damaged school buildings and the first request from Sint Maarten focused on 
receiving support to reopen the schools. Temporary buildings and facilities were needed. The 
Ministry of OCW immediately bought large pavilion tents with air-conditioning and sent them via the 
57
Karel Doorman. A total of 36 school classes fit in the three pavilion tents. However, the two-week 
period of shipment meant that once the tents arrived and could get set up, needs on the island had 
shifted. The military police helped with setting up the tents. The first schools were already 
58
reopening on Monday 3 October  and the tents were in the end not used as school tents.  
 
No evaluation was carried out specifically for OCW’s response. 
 
Table 4.9 Projects emergency response (Ministry of OCW) 
Projects Expenses (x € Output Results 
1000) 
Purchase pavilion tents 642 3 Pavilion tents  
Setting up of temporary 
Coordination installation 73 Installation tents 
airconditioned spaces and 
tents 
Air-conditioning units 25 Aircon units for the 3 purchase of educational 
materials to restart education 
pavilion tents 
for students as soon as 
Educational materials 96 Supply of school 
possible 
materials (exercises, 
scissors, ballpoint pens, 
pencils, etc.), classroom 
furnishings (clocks, 
whiteboard erasers, 
brooms, etc.), other 
 
56
  Ministerie van BZK (mei 2018), Sint Maarten, Irma en BZK: Evaluatie crisisbeheer ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken, 
Den Haag (p. 9). 
57
     https://www.noordhollandsdagblad.nl/cnt/dmf20180921_56435137?utm_source=google&utm_medium=organic 
58
   https://www.telegraaf.nl/nieuws/425366/scholen-op-sint-maarten-weer-open 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 53 
 
   
 

 
Project Expenses  Output Activities 
(x € 1000) 
Rhenus air transport emergency 180 Transport of 15 sea Transport of heavy 
supplies containers (40 ft) materials.  
3 containers for heavy  
material (20 ft) 
1 container for office 
supplies (40 ft) 
From Rotterdam to 
Phillipsburg 
Heavy material KDM. 1.769 Heavy-duty rolling stock for Rehabilitation of 
rehabilitation of vital vital infrastructure.  
infrastructure (dump trucks, 
water tank trucks for water 
distribution, bulldozers and 
excavators to clean up 
debris). 
Transport costs ship November 139 Cargo space ship RDAM > Transport of heavy 
20th SXM. materials.  
 
Ambulance costs RAV 71 Ambulance services: 5 amb. Support to 
drivers, 5 amb. nurses, 5 ambulance 
amb. dispatchers services. 
Deployment of VRU information 294 1.185 hour front office (BZK) Unknown. 
managers 1.185 hour back office 
(veiligheidsinformatiecentrum 
VRU) 
Overhead (coordination, 
travel and parking costs) 
Costs Saba 901 Repair work roads, harbour, Repairs to public 
buildings, water works space 
Costs Statia 443 Repair work Unknown 
Wood chipper Saba 77 Wood chipper for Saba, Repairs to public 
ordered in the USA. space 
Return of evacuees Sint Maarten. 100 Charter Insel Air (diabetes Evacuees returned 
patients) 20k to safer places  
Repair Cliff Statia 136 Fence to prevent further Fencing off of cliff  
erosion of the cliff. 
Labour costs Saba 235 Labour costs for house House repairs 
repairs (6 houses) 
Waterman Statia 84 Transport emergency  
supplies with the Waterman 
Children's rights UNICEF 33 Child Protection programme Identification of the 
specialist, hotel costs, tickets needs of children 
and expenses expert 
Customs service vehicles signalling 8 Three custom services Unknown 
vehicles signalling sets  
Costs OM PPG repair work 47 Repair work Unknown 
Transport office furniture OM 57 Surplus office furniture Unknown 
collected, transported within 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 55 
 
   
 

 
 
112. This letter also outlined the next steps in the emergency response process:  
 
“For the coming period, the priority for Sint Maarten will be the further restoration of the vital infrastructure 
(airport, seaport, prison), water pipes, houses, hospital, GP practices, pharmacies, schools and improving the 
functioning of the distribution points, so that the population is enabled to resume their daily life as soon as 
possible.”   
 
61
113. The assessment of the Damage Assessment Team , from 20 September 2017 (after Hurricane 
Maria), showed that the main roads, the airport and the harbour were partly functioning again, but 
still needed further repairs. The situation was the same regarding water supply, electricity supply, 
gas stations, public services (hospital, police station, fire station and ambulance station) and 
schools.  
 
114. Most public services were operational approximately one month later, in the first week of October. 
The majority of aid workers had left the country. On 10 October 2017, Princess Juliana International 
Airport (SXM) reopened to commercial services. Prior to this, the airport had only been operating 
military and relief flights. Although the terminal hall was not operational, all airlines were set to 
resume operations. 
 
115. The Netherlands provided emergency assistance for the period until 30 November 2017, after 
which it began contributing to the reconstruction of St Maarten, Saba and Sint Eustatius.  
 
 
4.6 Efficiency 
116. A key question in a policy review concerns the efficiency of the implemented policy. Policy 
efficiency is defined as the degree to which the optimal effect is achieved – at the least possible 
cost and with the least possible undesirable side effects. In contrast to many other policy fields, 
efficiency is not the main priority in case of emergency assistance and crisis situations; only timely 
action and the right support is essential.  
 
In the case of Irma, this was done by assessing primary needs and by prioritising what needed to 
be done at an early stage. The roles of each respective ministry were then determined, and asked 
to make financial resources available. This approach meant that the financing of the emergency 
response was quickly arranged and secured. 
 
117. In order to ensure that the funds were spent efficiently, it was agreed in the MCCB of Thursday, 7 
September that the costs for the provision of emergency assistance to Sint Maarten, Sint Eustatius 
and Saba would be financed centrally from the budget of the Ministry of BZK. The following 
definition was used for direct emergency assistance: "direct emergency assistance is aimed at 
keeping the stricken population safe, keeping dangerous situations directly related to the disaster 
under control and maintaining public order and safety". The activities consist of rescuing and 
temporarily sheltering victims, setting up and organising an adequately functioning vital 
62
infrastructure, organising food, setting up adequate facilities and countering looting. 
 
118. In view of the need to act quickly, a modified waiver procedure was developed by the Ministry of 
BZK for emergency assistance requests. In this modified procedure, the usual procurement 
procedures are waived for emergency assistance, and only a record of the purchase order and 
 
61
  Koninklijke Luchtmacht, 20 september 2017. Schadebeeld Sint Maarten na orkanen IRMA en MARIA 2017. 
62
  See Ministerie van BZK (14 september 2017), Nota Waiver procedure- inzake noodhulp orkaan Irma Sint Maarten. 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 57 
 
   
 

 
from them. In addition, various ministries in the Netherlands have further elaborated their roles and 
relevant procedures in concrete internal instructions and handbooks since 2018. Of particular 
interest have been arrangements under the Regional Platform for Crisis Cooperation. 
 
 
4.8 Conclusions on emergency response 
Conclusion 3 In the initial phase, global assessments were carried out by various parties to 
determine the damage. For assistance, the “requests for assistance” are the most important 
instrument. Due to the coordination problems mentioned, the requests for assistance from Sint 
Maarten only got underway late (from 12 September 2017) and could have benefitted from a 
greater level of detail. The system worked better on Saba and Sint Eustatius, and requests for 
assistance were made to the Netherlands before Irma came ashore.  
 
122. When a disaster occurs, it is crucial – especially in the beginning – to identify both the extent of the 
damage, and what is most-needed at an early stage. In the days following Hurricane Irma, several 
such damage assessments were distributed; by Defence, the media, NGOs and local people, 
among others. The sum of these damage assessments together formed a picture of the situation on 
the islands. In a Letter to the Parliament, dated 8 September 2017 (kst-34773-1, ISSN 0921 - 7371, 
's-Gravenhage 2017), the extent of damage caused by Irma was described. These assessments 
were intended to get an initial idea of the scale of the disaster and to determine the level of 
resources to be reserved. 
 
Requests for assistance in the emergency assistance system are of great importance for the actual 
implementation of emergency assistance, and for the delivery of relief goods and services. Due to 
the coordination problems previously mentioned, the requests for further assistance for needs and 
relief supplies from Sint Maarten to the Netherlands only began late. Furthermore, as requests for 
assistance were in some cases not formulated in a detailed manner they left room for interpretation, 
at times leading to supplies being sent that were not best suited to meet the demands.   
 
In addition, decisions were sometimes made because of time pressure. In the case of the Karel 
Doorman, for example, it was important to load the ship quickly, because the sailing time between 
the Netherlands and the Caribbean meant that the goods would only arrive 2 weeks after send-off. 
Because the departments on Sint Maarten could not agree on a definitive list, the Netherlands 
made its own choices on emergency relief supplies. 
 
123. In the case of Saba and Sint Eustatius, requests for assistance were made to the Netherlands 
before Irma came ashore. Here the system worked faster and better, so that help could be provided 
in a much more targeted way, especially in the first period after Irma. 
 
Conclusion 4 The Ministry of Defence was well equipped to provide the initial emergency 
assistance shortly before, and in the first weeks after, Irma's passage. After that, the Ministry of 
BZK took over the coordinating role. According to the evaluations carried out, this transfer was not 
smooth. 
 
124. In the initial phase of emergency assistance, the Ministry of Defence was particularly active in 
providing relief. Saba and Sint Eustatius had also requested aid early, via an official request for 
help. The Ministry of Defence was well equipped in this regard, owing to its presence in the region 
with a base of operations in both Curacao and Aruba. On 18 September, the Ministry of Defence 
officially transferred the directing role to the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations. The 
Ministry of Defence evaluation shows that the transfer was difficult in the beginning. At the time of 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 59 
 
   
 

 
Conclusion 7 The extent to which the emergency goods were procured at the best possible price 
cannot be determined. This is an important caveat in assessing cost-effectiveness.. 
 
129. The goods and services offered during the emergency assistance phase were diverse. Requests 
for assistance were often accompanied by an exhaustive, detailed list of requested articles. From 
the available documentation, a request for medicines included quantities, brands, etc. A request for 
building materials included the requested number of screws, nails, m2 of wood, etc. Due to this 
highly-detailed level, it cannot be verified whether the most efficient method of purchase or 
acquisition was chosen for the requested goods. Certainly in the initial phase, there was little or 
insufficient time for this, as speed of action was necessary. This does not alter the fact that, in a 
number of cases, (certainly for the larger expenditure items) quotations were requested from 
several parties during the emergency assistance phase. In the available documentation, there are 
emails in which an employee asks his superior for approval of a certain purchase. However, it is not 
clear from the available sources on which basis a choice was ultimately made for one of the 
providers. 
 
Conclusion 8 The coordinating role of the Ministry of BZK and the modified waver procedure for 
procurement gave ministries sufficient flexibility to act with the desired speed, but also resulted in 
highly fragmented documentation regarding the decision-making process and the choices made. 
 
130. The experience with Article 8 shows that activities funded under emergency response are poorly 
documented. Because various ministries and other parties were involved in the implementation, the 
available documentation is also difficult to access. Financial documentation of the Ministry of BZK is 
not always well-labelled, and adjustments due to exchange rate fluctuations are often not related to 
specific disbursements. Even more importantly, implementing partners report on activities in highly 
generic terms. For this policy review, an inordinate amount of time (more than nine months) was 
spent tracing documents in financial archives and in Digidoc. This is due to shortcomings in the 
institutional memory of the Ministry. 
 
Conclusion 9 On the basis of lessons learned during the post-Irma crisis, the Government of the 
Netherlands has reviewed its role and capacity to respond to large scale crises in the Caribbean 
parts of the Kingdom and took a variety of measures. Fundamental considerations have been the 
autonomous status of Curaçao, Aruba and Sint Maarten and the responsibilities for emergency 
preparedness and immediate disaster response accruing from this autonomous status.  
 
131. As from 2018, the Government of the Netherlands took a variety of measures to improve on its 
disaster response capacity on the basis of lessons learned during the post-Irma crisis. In June 
2020, the Netherlands Ministry of Justice and Security and the Ministry of BZK published a 
handbook on crisis management for the Caribbean parts of the Kingdom. The Handbook on crisis 
management for the Caribbean parts of the Kingdom published in June 2020 draws lessons from 
the post-hurricane experiences in 2017 and seeks to clarify roles and procedures of different 
ministries in the Netherlands and other partners in case the European Netherlands is requested to 
intervene in disaster management in the Caribbean. The handbook does not discuss disaster 
preparedness and response on the islands, as this is considered part of local responsibilities in Sint 
Eustatius and Saba and a national responsibility in the case of Sint Maarten. It is understood that 
procedures defined in the handbook need to be tested and disseminated in practice. Since 2020, 
this has been done in joint disaster drills (HUREX), during which different parties to be called upon 
can familiarize themselves with what is expected from them. 
 
 
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 61 
 
   
 

 
and local NGOs. Preference was given to those already active on the ground and those with 
existing links to ongoing activities under the emergency response. These organisations were 
thought to be best suited to identify needs and develop project proposals to address these needs. 
 
135. The rolled-out projects (see Section 5.2) can be grouped under the components of food provision 
(school meals), housing (construction projects, voucher programme and rebuilding small 
community infrastructure), psychosocial support (psychosocial assistance) and labour market 
(re)integration (retraining courses, life skills education, waste to work, island clean up), with 
organisations often tackling several of these issues under one programme.  
 
Table 5.1 Budget of the early recovery projects on Article 8.1 (in € x 1.000) 
 
Total 
White Yellow Cross Care Foundation 980 
Construction project 851 
Retraining courses 129 
UNICEF Netherlands 453 
Psychosocial assistance 102 
Life skills education 259 
Project management and other costs 92 
Netherlands Red Cross  1.225 
Waste to work 225 
School meals 1.000 
UNDP 2.242 
Voucher programme 500 houses 1.645 
Rebuilding small community infrastructure - 
Island clean up 597 
Qredits  555 
Soft loans 555 
SMDF  1.280 
Elderly home repair project 1.293 
Total Early Recovery (in €) 6.735 
Source: Financieel overzicht WBE SXM 15072021 
 
 
5.2 Effectiveness and efficiency 
136. The activities carried out under the early recovery phase are presented below, organised by 
implementing organisation. The activities have not undergone independent evaluations – 
implementing parties self-reported results and progress under the obligatory reporting procedure of 
the Ministry of BZK. 
 
White Yellow Cross Care Foundation (WYCCF) 
137. The White Yellow Cross Care Foundation is a local foundation that provides professional care 
services such as hospice, elderly care, nursing home care and general nursing care to the elderly in 
71
Sint Maarten. Their long history providing these services on the island , and their work during the 
emergency response phase, made them a natural partner for activities under the early recovery 
 
71
 The White Yellow Cross Care Foundation having been founded in 1970 and the White Yellow Cross Care Foundation in 
2003.  
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 63 
 
   
 

 
largely comparable to similar efforts. It is important to note that the scale of work varied significantly 
between houses, with some repairs costing less than US$1,000 and the most expensive one being 
nearly US$30,000. The WYCCF self-reported that they benefited from dealing with a regular 
clientele and the fact that, as a private foundation, they could appoint a contractor directly and thus 
were not dependent on public tenders.  
 
Developing employable skills in the population 
141. The care training projects rapidly received 115 registrations, primarily from women who worked in 
hospitality, most of whom were reached through social media channels. Men, who tend to be less 
active on these channels, proved to be harder to reach at the beginning, requiring the WYCCF to 
proactively search for candidates. Trainees received a stipend as well as theoretical and practical 
training. Trainees in the care programme participated in rotating 4-day internship programs within 
76
the WYCCF facilities, SMMC and external contractors. A total of 37 trainees graduated and five 
got certificates for finished modules. The average expense per trainee was approximately 
US$5,659. The programme had a low drop-out rate and a high workforce integration rate, with 
approximately 80% of construction graduates and 90% of healthcare trainees having found a job 
77
three months after graduation.  
 
142. The three projects implemented by the WYCCF either met or came close to meeting their initial 
targets. The projects were implemented within the expected timeframe and largely within the 
expected budget. The designed interventions were highly relevant, as a result of the WYCCF’s 
understanding of the context and existing relations on the ground. The project benefitted from the 
implementing party’s knowledge of its clients — which allowed for a quick and accurate mapping of 
housing needs — and from the project’s design — which allowed some of the trained personnel to 
take up jobs within the WYCCF shortly after graduation. The established relationship between the 
78
WYCCF and the main contracted construction company also allowed for easy contracting and  
smooth collaboration.  
 
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF NL) 
143. UNICEF is the United Nations agency responsible for providing humanitarian and developmental 
aid to children. UNICEF Netherlands is a National Committee with the primary task of fund raising 
for the UNICEF organisation, which does advocacy and humanitarian work in the Kingdom of the 
Netherlands. UNICEF NL had a small office staffed with volunteers in Sint Maarten before the 
hurricane. In the aftermath of the hurricane, UNICEF NL was formally invited by the Government of 
Sint Maarten to conduct a post-disaster needs assessments in the areas of child protection and 
79 80
education. This assessment found that the hurricane had worsened existing vulnerabilities, and 
informed UNICEF NL’s proposal for two projects designed to provide life skills education for 
adolescents and psychosocial support to children.  
 
 
Table 5.3  UNICEF NL projects in the early recovery phase 
Project and timeline Expenses  Target and results 
Life skills education through sports for €259,145 • Initial target: 25-30 trained local football 
adolescents coaches. 
January 2018 – September 2018 
 
and by re-allocating some excess funds from the training projects, was of $65,000. Source: White Yellow Cross Care 
Foundation, Final Report Reconstruction Projects, September 30th 2018.  
76 rd
 White Yellow Cross Care Foundation, 3 Report, 5 June 2018.  
77 rd
 White Yellow Cross Care Foundation, 3 Report, 5 June 2018 
78
 Leeward Island Construction Company, LICCOM)  
79
 UNICEF Nederland, Sint Maarten Post-Hurricane Irma Assessment, November 2017 
80
 UNICEF Nederland, Early Recovery Final Report, 13 December 2018 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 65 
 
   
 

 
the following year. The programme continued into 2019 with implementation by the SXMFF and 
85
regular funding from the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA).  
 
Support training to address emotional stress after a disaster 
147. The goal of the Psychosocial Assistance project was to reduce the incidence of children showing 
86
signs of emotional stress after the hurricane. The project was planned around two components, 
87
namely, the provision of psychosocial support training and materials and the organisation of a 
88
Children’s Rights Film Festival (CRFF). The support training was based on the existing UNICEF 
Return to Happiness (RtH) programme, designed for children who have experienced trauma, and 
adapted to the Caribbean context. The programme had a train-the-trainers approach, where 
individuals having completed the training were expected to be able to pass on the training to peers 
in the future. The programme therefore had two tranches, with initial training in April and a follow-up 
RtH peer-to-peer training in May.  
 
148. The peer-to-peer component did not roll out as envisioned, as teachers were busy with other 
training and often struggled to find time away from the classroom. There was also a slight change in 
training focus. The RtH programme was intended to address the needs of children living in adverse 
circumstances after the hurricane. Due to delays in the implementation — attributed to the hectic 
calendars of the teachers — the training shifted to preparing those to implement the RtH 
programme after a (future) disaster, and not for dealing with the immediate aftermath of Hurricane 
89
Irma. 
 
149. The film components involved the training of 18 teachers and youth leaders, and resulted in five 
films premiering at an event attended by close to 250 people. Six children who had participated in 
the projects travelled to Curacao to participate in the film festival. UNICEF had initially intended for 
the children to reflect on experiences related to the hurricane in their drawings and the resulting film 
scripts. However, this was not the case, with the children largely focusing their projects on other 
topics. The final report for the project attributes this to the teachers receiving insufficient training on 
the subject matter, and therefore, being more comfortable with other topics on children’s rights (e.g. 
protection from drugs or the right to education). 
 
The Netherlands Red Cross (NLRC) 
150. The Red Cross was present in Sint Maarten prior to the hurricane, with a local chapter made up 
mostly of volunteers. This chapter came into action quickly and received €19 million through the 
fundraising campaign ‘Nationale Actie Nederland Helpt Sint Maarten’ – immediately following the 
hurricane – in the Netherlands. These funds were used for food assistance and for roof and 
90
housing repairs, including technical assessments of physical damage provided on request.  
 
151. The NLRC team on the island needed reinforcements to be able to disburse the amounts of funding 
coming in, so volunteers and personnel were brought in from the Netherlands. In the first months 
there was a high turnover of Heads of Mission, which affected the Red Cross’ efforts internally and 
the potential collaboration with other groups active on the ground. This situation, however, was 
stabilised in 2018. The NLRC proposed two projects to the Ministry of BZK, to complement their 
ongoing activities. 
 Table 5.4 Netherlands Red Cross projects in the early recovery phase 
 
85
 UNICEF Nederland, Early Recovery Final Report, 13 December 2018. 
86
 UNICEF Nederland, Project Proposal, December 2017. 
87
 The distribution of RtH materials was funded by the Red Cross.  
88
 Based on the existing UNICEF Film Festival in the Netherlands and similar events organised by UNICEF worldwide, the 
Festival is employed as a tool to broaden knowledge about children’s rights within society and to express the perspectives 
of children also after disaster. 
89
 UNICEF Nederland, Early Recovery Final Report, 13 December 2018. 
90
 Red Cross, Terugkoppeling 2017-2021 Nationale Actie ‘Nederland Helpt Sint Maarten’, September 2021 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 67 
 
   
 

 
project can be said to have been effective in establishing the necessary pre-conditions required for 
this initiative. 
 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
155. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) is a UN organisation tasked with eradicating 
poverty and reducing inequalities through the sustainable development of nations. At the time of the 
hurricane UNDP had a regional presence and a running programme with the Government of Sint 
Maarten. The organisation arrived in Sint Maarten shortly after the hurricane and was active during 
97
the emergency response period. 
 
156. The UNDP proposed a comprehensive programme titled Recovering Back Better, consisting of 
three activities: the clearance of debris with a cash-for-work scheme, an emergency employment 
scheme for vulnerable local people, and the repairs of roofs belonging to disadvantaged 
98
homeowners or families otherwise in need of help. The programme was phased to start with a 
stronger focus on the debris removal and the employment scheme, and to later have a stronger 
focus on the housing programme. 
 
Table 5.5  UNDP projects in the early recovery phase 
Project Expenses  Target and results 
Housing Voucher programme ‘500 Huizen’ $2,604,976 • Initial target: 500 dwellings to be 
January 2018 – January 2019 repaired. 
• Adjusted target: 75 dwellings to be 
repaired. 
• Output/outcome: 76 dwellings repaired. 
Island Clean up  $706,000 • Initial target: 500 people benefit from an 
emergency employment scheme through 
clean-up activities. 
• Adjusted target: 300 people.  
• Output: 204 people participated. 
 
3
• Outcome: 16 000m of hurricane debris 
removed and 87 backyards and public 
spaces cleaned up. 
Rebuilding small community $572,000 • Initial target: 50 community 
infrastructure infrastructures rehabilitated.  
n.a. • Output/outcome: none.  
Note: The total contribution of the Ministry of BZK was of €2,242,000. UNDP contributed €664,000 to the projects. The  
completion of the Housing Voucher project required a re-allocation of funds from the Small Community Infrastructure project. 
 
Repairing 500 houses in Sint Maarten 
157. The Housing programme aimed to support the reconstruction and repair of 500 houses (of the 
island’s most vulnerable). As with most of the house repair projects after the hurricane, the focus 
was primarily on roof repair. The activities were to be implemented through the training and hiring of 
ten local teams, in line with the employment-intensive approach planned for the UNDP’s 
intervention.  
 
 
97
 In particular, the UNDP brought in an expert from the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination (UNDAC) to 
provide coordination support. The coordination activities carried out were regarded favourably by other NGOs, as reported 
by stakeholders.  
98
 UNDP, Sint Maarten Recovering Back Better Project Final Report, 2019. 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 69 
 
   
 

 
163. Target indicators were significantly re-adjusted during the timeline, as was the approach to meeting 
them. The UNDP-implemented projects can therefore not be considered to have been implemented 
effectively or efficiently. While the roof repair project surpassed the adjusted target (76 out of 75), 
the employment scheme project did not (204 out of 300) and the community infrastructure project 
was not implemented. Costs significantly increased and required a contribution from the UNDP for 
project continuation. 
 
Qredits 
106
164. Qredits is a Dutch, non-profit microfinance institution that assists entrepreneurs with loans and 
mentoring, particularly those that are typically excluded from accessing credit through regular 
channels. Qredits was already active in the region prior to the hurricane and had recently set up an 
107
office in Sint Maarten.   
 
Table 5.6  Qredits projects in the early recovery phase 
Project and timeline Expenses Target and results 
90 Soft loans €555,000 • Initial target: 90 loans granted under 
1 December 2017 to 30 June 2018 soft loan conditions. 
• Output: 90 loans granted. 
Note: A total of 96 loans were granted under soft loan conditions, of which 6 were financed by Qredits.  
 
165. Qredits’ proposal to the Ministry of BZK was to set up new microloans (of up to US$25,000) at an 
interest rate of 2% – compared to their usual rate of 9% – and with a grace period of one year for 
90 entrepreneurs. The project budget was used to offer credit access to Micro, Small and Medium-
sized Enterprises (MSMEs) and entrepreneurs against these new rates. The project proposal 
requested €550,000 to cover the difference between the usual rate of 9.75% and the proposed 
temporary ‘Early Recovery’ rate of 2%, as well as cover personnel costs and project costs 
associated with the expected increase of applications. The default risks of these loans were taken 
108
on by Qredits.  
  
166. Qredits received 218 requests during the period of December 2017 to June 2018 and granted 96 
loans for a total value of US$2.3 million. The project was well received and found to support 
existing businesses in investing in the recovery (or expansion) of their business, as well as 
supporting entrepreneurs to set up new businesses. The high rate of applications — more than 
109
double the monthly applications received in, for example, Aruba — showed that the loans were 
responding to a real need amongst the population in a post-hurricane setting. The selection process 
also proved successful, with only four fully defaulting on their loans, and ten falling behind on 
payment. 
 
167. As of the end of the early recovery period, Qredits still had 64 open requests for loans to process. 
In May 2018, the organisation sent a formal request to the Ministry of BZK to fund a second tranche 
of 100 loans. This request was rejected, under the reasoning that the early recovery phase was 
110
coming to an end and that further financing should be funded by the Trust Fund.  Qredits 
expressed its disappointment at the lack of continuation of a successful intervention in the Final 
111
Report. The organisation continued offering its “standard” loan package after the early recovery 
 
106
 Qredits is established as a non-profit with ANBI status (Algemeen Nut Beogende Instelling) which translates to a Public 
Benefit Organisation 
107
 The office was set up in August 2017 and also services Saba and Sint Eustatius. Source: Proposal ‘Ondersteuning MKB op 
th
Bovenwindse Eilanden bij Wederopbouw’, Qcredits. December 20 2017.  
108
 Final Report “Eindverslag subsidiebeschikking onder nummer 2017-0000662632”, Qredits, July 2021. 
109
 Final Report “Eindverslag subsidiebeschikking onder nummer 2017-0000662632”, Qredits, July 2021. 
110
 Final Report “Eindverslag subsidiebeschikking onder nummer 2017-0000662632”, Qredits, July 2021. 
111
 Final Report “Eindverslag subsidiebeschikking onder nummer 2017-0000662632”, Qredits, July 2021.  
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 71 
 
   
 

 
Most of the projects met the goal of getting to a quick start and directly impacting affected 
populations, though effectiveness and efficiency varied across projects. Most projects did at some 
stage have to adjust their scope and/or targets, as a result of changing costs or initial costs having 
been based on assumptions that did not hold. Regardless, most projects can be judged to have 
been moderately to strongly effective and efficient, with the main exception being those under the 
UNDP programme, which were neither effective nor efficient.  
 
Qredits’ soft loans, and the SMDF’s housing project, built on ongoing activities and allowed 
organisations to establish realistic goals and meet these within the time period. Similarly, the 
WYCCF embedded the training and construction activities into their structure, allowing them to 
make use of existing relations and networks. The UNDP, an organisation with less experience on 
the island, had to significantly adjust its project targets across the programme, after finding out that 
several of the assumptions made at proposal stage did not hold, as well as encountering tendering 
issues. The NLRC had a mixed experience. Their school meals programme can be deemed a 
success, but their roofing repair project (not funded by Article 8) encountered some challenges. 
Other projects (such as UNICEF’s psychosocial assistance to children and the NLRC’s 
Waste2Work initiative) required some adaptation during implementation to be able to meet their 
output targets.  
 
Conclusion 11 The overarching objective of the early recovery phase, to act as a bridging phase 
and to prevent a standstill of reconstruction efforts between the initial emergency response on Sint 
Maarten and the Trust Fund becoming operational, was not achieved. Several of the early recovery 
funded projects were well-suited to continue for longer periods of time, beyond the defined 6-month 
period. Additional budget would have allowed these projects to continue and to effectively 
contribute to filling the gap in reconstruction efforts that ensued.  
 
172. The Trust Fund, through which the larger part of reconstruction activities were channelled, became 
91 118 
operational in March 2019, while most of the early recovery activities wrapped up in June 2018. 
119
The overall instrument  of Direct Support funded reconstruction activities which were not 
considered appropriate for the Trust Fund and included direct support and liquidity support in 
addition to early recovery projects. However, the Direct Support rolled out in in 2018 and 2019 
mainly supported activities for border control, police and detention, which, while certainly important, 
did in no way build on or match the initiatives of the early recovery part of the instrument. Sint 
Maarten can therefore be said to have experienced a significant gap in Article 8-funded social 
activities over the course of 2019.  
 
173. This ‘standstill period’ was mentioned by multiple interviewees on the ground, who furthermore 
explained that there was a loss of confidence in the Article 8-funded reconstruction efforts when 
activities ceased. Most of the progress – related to the planning and set-up of the Trust Fund – 
120
happened behind the scenes, giving the impression that activities had halted. The activities 
meanwhile being funded under Direct Support were not targeting the population. Furthermore, the 
total budget for reconstruction (€550 million) had been largely publicised, and generated 
expectations in the population about the types of activities that would be rolled out in late 2018 or 
early 2019. Some stakeholders explained that locals began to feel sceptical about the Dutch-funded 
reconstruction activities when these expectations were not met. 
 
 
118
 The Emergency Recovery Project under the Trust Fund was approved in July 2018 and started disbursements on March 
2019. See also the Report on Part II of the Policy Review of Article 8. 
119
 See Report on Part II of the Policy Review of Article 8. 
120
 As expressed by interviewees.  
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 73 
 
   
 

 
6 Reconstruction of Sint Eustatius and Saba  
6.1 Introduction 
121
175. On 14 September 2017 Sint Eustatius requested assistance for the reconstruction of the island. 
The damages extended to: private homes (over 100 homes damaged), small businesses and 
hotels, utility poles and powerlines, the vegetation (80% of the vegetation was damaged) and the 
agricultural sector, with entire farm lands flattened and fruit trees uprooted.  
 
176. The crisis organisation on Saba scaled down on 13 September. An estimation for reconstruction 
work and supporting measures after hurricane Irma was sent to BZK on 17 September. In total, the 
estimated funds required were approximately US$10.8 million and included works on the airport, 
roads, buildings and support for economic development. Hurricane Maria caused additional 
damage on Saba, adding to the destruction already caused by hurricane Irma. On 2 October an 
additional cost estimation with regard to the damage resulting from Maria was submitted. This 
estimation focused on the reconstruction and reparation costs of the harbour, waste management 
system, roads, economy and disaster management. In total, these estimated funds amounted to 
US$16.3 million.  
 
177. On 10 November the Council of Ministers agreed to provide financial support to the public entities 
of Sint Eustatius and Saba. The total available envelope for the reconstruction amounted to €67 
million. For Sint Eustatius, roughly €43 million was made available; for Saba, about €23.8 million. 
These amounts covered nearly the entirety of the costs of estimated damages. The total amount 
was placed on the general budget line of the Ministry of Finance. 
 
178. The islands proposed reconstruction projects in consultation with line ministries and under the 
coordination of the Ministry of BZK. BZK was therefore not financially accountable for projects 
managed by other departments and implemented their own set of projects, including house repairs 
and repairs in the public space (including the stabilisation of the cliff). The amount for these projects 
was transferred from the general post to Article 8 of the Ministry of BZK. Table 6.1 shows all 
reconstruction projects, including those of other ministries focused on e.g. the airport, roads, 
harbour and education. 
 
Table 6.1 Financial budget of the reconstruction on Sint Eustatius and Saba after Irma (all ministries) (in 
EUR x 1.000) 
Part Sint Eustatius (EUR x 1 000) Saba (EUR x 1 000) 
Ministry of IenW 28.737 18.069 
Airport 4.825 675 
Erosion Airport 10.000  
Harbour 12.000 15.000 
Roads 400 300 
Garbage 1.312 1.894 
Water 200 200 
   
Ministry of OCW 273 170 
Education 273 170 
   
 
121
  Letter to minister Plasterk with request for assistance for reconstruction. 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 75 
 
   
 

 
Part Amount (€) 
- Water storage 129 
- Public graveyards 405 
- Fence old administrative building 23 
Nature and environment; of which: 800 
- Repair agriculture and fishery 118 
- Water catchment agricultural businesses 129 
- Coral recovery 91 
- Repair buoys and mooring system marine 37 
park 
- Recovery botanical garden 36 
- Reforest 331 
- Recovery breeding of sea turtles 26 
- Iguana population 5 
- Conservation fence behind Stenapa 26 
Total in € 14.992 
 
183. Communication between Sint Eustatius and the Ministry of BZK was clear during the reconstruction 
phase, which started immediately after the emergency assistance. Effective relations resulted in 
short lines and quick action. The budgets were allocated in a timely manner and the projects started 
rapidly thereafter. Some of the projects were delayed due to shortage of materials and labour, 
however, extensions were provided by the Ministry of BZK in order to overcome these issues. 
 
Stabilisation of the cliff  
184. The majority of the budget was spent on the stabilisation of the cliff. The project aimed to increase 
stability and stop the erosion of the cliff for the next five decades. The project addressed a 
combination of hurricane damage and deferred maintenance. The project had already been 
discussed with BZK in 2016, due to severe safety issues. The hurricane worsened the situation; 
however, the structure was already in a precarious state and required attention before the 
hurricane. The funds from the cliff, under the reconstruction, are part of the total reconstruction 
funds of the Ministry of BZK, but as a project it was independent and was not placed under the local 
reconstruction program.  
 
185. The allocation of the budget was done in 5 tranches, and the project was tendered internationally. 
The project was too complex, too specialised and too large to tender locally. Only a few selected 
parties responded to the tender, and one was selected. A contract was signed in January between 
the public entity, Sint Eustatius, and contractor, Acrobat X Caraibes St. Martin/Acrobat X France, 
122
concerning the re-stabilisation of the cliff surrounding Fort Oranje. The project was monitored by 
RoyalHaskoning, who advised the Ministry of BZK before the next tranche was allocated to the 
123
project.  
 
186. In total, 2,800 anchors, 7,400 square metres of canvas and just under 16,000 m3 of mesh were 
124
placed since 2019. The construction works ended in May 2020. However, some additional funds 
were required in order to complete the works. On 24 September 2021, a request was made by the 
Government Commissioner of Sint Eustatius for the expansion of the budget within the 
reconstruction funds for the stabilisation of the cliff. The additional works consisted of the building of 
 
122
  https://www.thedailyherald.sx/islands/statia-cliff-protection-project-in-full-swing 
123
  Beschikking bijzondere uitkering eerste tranche wederopbouwmiddelen stabilisering klif Sint Eustatius. 11 december 2018. 
Kenmerk: 2018-0000948301. 
124
  https://www.statiagovernment.com/news-and-tenders/news/2020/05/06/cliff-stabilization-project-fort-oranje-nears-
completion 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 77 
 
   
 

 
safety and were almost all locally tendered. Due to the busy schedule of local contractors, these 
projects were pushed back slightly, as priority was given to repairing houses. At the time of writing, 
all projects have been completed.  
 
Nature and environment 
190. The environmental damage affected the flora and fauna on the island. Projects established to 
restore the natural environment included, amongst others, projects focused on agricultural 
recovery, agricultural water supply, coral restoration, recovery buoys and mooring system, 
restoration of the botanical garden, reforestation and recovery of breeding sea turtles. STENAPA 
(Sint Eustatius National Parks Foundation) was the implementing party for the majority of the nature 
and environment projects. STENAPA is dedicated to managing, conserving and restoring Sint 
132
Eustatius’ natural resources and educating the community of its values. The projects aligned 
largely with their mission and vision. All projects met the expectations and have been finalised 
according to the progress reports, which state that the latest projects were expected to be finished 
at the end of 2021.  
 
Concluding remarks on the reconstruction in Sint Eustatius 
 
191. Reconstruction on Sint Eustatius was carried out effectively and efficiently and furthermore, made 
the island more resilient and future-proof. The largest project, the stabilisation of the cliff, was 
finalised in time and without any major issues. Upon the team’s mission in 2021 the team was 
informed that it was still holding up and that the much needed vegetation had grown in well. The 
housing repairs carried out on the island were similarly effective and, despite some issues with 
rising costs of material, carried out efficiently. A highly dedicated team ensured all targeted houses 
got repaired, and that this was done according to the building decree.  
 
 
 
6.3 Effectiveness and efficiency of the reconstruction of Saba 
192. The budget from Article 8 for Saba totals €3.9 million, the majority of which was reserved for 
housing and public space (€3.7 million). €200.000 was reserved for projects in nature and 
environment. The Public Entity Saba received the reconstruction budget from the Ministry of BZK. 
 
Table 6.3 Financial contributions of Article 8 of the reconstruction on Saba after Irma (in € x 1.000) 
Part Amount (€) 
Housing & public space; of which: 3.661 
- Personnel and materials non-governmental 2.300 
buildings 
- Furniture 200 
- Governmental buildings 800 
- Demolishing inhabitable buildings 300 
- Playgrounds 61 
Nature and environment 200 
Total in € 3.861 
 
 
 
132
  Website STENAPA: https://www.statiapark.org/about-us/ 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 79 
 
   
 

 
Concluding remarks on the reconstruction in Saba 
198. The reconstruction activities in Saba were carried out effectively and efficiently as all projects were 
delivered, despite the challenges faced in findings supplies and labour on the island and across the 
region in the aftermath of the hurricane and during the COVID-19 pandemic. The reconstruction of 
houses and public spaces was furthermore done according to good practices for more resilient 
buildings. The island also benefited from its population’s discipline in cleaning up debris and storing 
away loose items in anticipation of the hurricane, which mitigated the damage caused by the 
hurricane(s).   
 
 
6.4 Other activities 
Repair of the SSCS sea cable 
199. Around €1.5 million was allocated to a subsidy to repair the SSCS sea cable.  
 
Table 6.4 Financial contributions Article 8 for the repair of the SSCS sea cable after Irma (in € x 1.000) 
Part Amount (€) 
Subsidy SSCS sea cable 1.538 
 
200. The islands of Saba and Sint Eustatius have been connected via a submarine network to the 
international sea cable network of St. Kitts, Sint Maarten and St. Bart’s since 2013. However, the 
hurricanes damaged the cable protection and landing constructions. SSCS set up a tender 
procedure and commissioned Walhout Civil to design a new cable landing structure in Saba. Works 
142
were delayed due to COVID-19 restrictions and were therefore only conducted later in 2020 and 
143 144
during 2021, but have now been finalised. , The system was constructed more robustly than 
145
prior to Hurricane Irma ('build back better'). EY Curacao was hired to conduct a final report on the 
146
works and to complete an audit at the end of the project.  
 
Relation with other relevant policies 
201. The goal of the reconstruction phase fits the ambition to change the socio-economic perspective to 
improve the Caribbean Netherlands – which has been the central focus point of the Government of 
the Netherlands’ policy in recent years. The objective of the support from the government is to 
147
reduce poverty on the islands. On Sint Eustatius, ‘gross neglect of duty’, by the island 
commissioners and the island council prior to 2018, had a harmful effect on the island’s people and 
148
businesses. Furthermore, the delays in projects to improve the island’s roads, water supply, 
housing and waste processing had a direct impact on people’s lives. The recovery budget was used 
to accelerate measures, which boosted the economy and raised the quality of life. For Saba, the 
Saba Package was signed in 2019. This administrative agreement is aimed at anchoring and 
further developing the positive cooperation between the Government of the Netherlands and the 
public entity Saba. The Saba Package provides a more focused approach to the challenges and 
opportunities that exist on Saba, and on which the Central Government and the Public Entity of 
149
Saba are working together. Some of the projects that were started in the emergency phase and 
 
142
  Document: Overzicht bepsreken voortgang SSCS B.V. herstelreparatie orkaanschade. 27 augustus 2021.  
143
  Brief betreffende vertraging resterende werkzaamheden zeekabel. D.d. 1 april 2021. 
144
  Website Walhout Civil. Available at: https://www.walhoutcivil.com/en/projects/design-cofferdam-and-breakwater-
submarine-cable-landing-saba 
145
  Document: Toelichting herstelwerkzaamheden aan de SSCS zeekabel.  
146
  SSCS B.V. Tussenrapportage subsidie reparative cable system. 14 januari 2020.  
147
  Ministery of Interior. BZK introductiedossier 2021 deel I. 2021. 
148
  https://www.government.nl/ministries/ministry-of-the-interior-and-kingdom-relations/documents/questions-and-
answers/questions-and-answers-about-the-intervention-in-statia/index 
149
  Rijksdiensten. Saba Package regelt gerichte samenwerking tussen Rijk en Saba. 27 June 2019. Available at: 
https://www.rijksdienstcn.com/actueel/nieuws/2019/juni/27/saba-package-regelt-gerichte-samenwerking-tussen-rijk-en-
saba 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 81 
 
   
 

 
attributed to e.g. a lack of construction supplies in the region or a small workforce on the island(s). 
Some major conclusions are: 
a. All houses that were part of the damage assessment were repaired. On Sint Eustatius, the 
cost of the damage and the duration of the house repairs were estimated to be lower than 
finally realised for several reasons. Materials and manpower became scarce, which drove 
up prices and delayed the process. In addition, on Saba the impression of the evaluation 
team is that more expensive improvements to the structures of the buildings were made – 
as part of building back better to withstand future hurricanes – than initially included in the 
damage assessment. The team noted that measures were taken during the 
implementation to carry out the projects as efficiently as possible.  
b. The majority of the budget for reconstruction on Sint Eustatius was spent on the 
stabilisation of the cliff. The project is currently finished. The project addressed a 
combination of hurricane damage and deferred maintenance. While the hurricane 
significantly worsened the situation, the structures had already been in a precarious state 
and required attention before the hurricane.  
c. This also applies to a number of public spaces on Sint Eustatius (graveyards, NH 
church).  
 
Although all projects were implemented, the selection of projects on Saba and Sint Eustatius shows 
that the focus from BZK and other ministries was broader than solely damage repair after the 
hurricane. The focus was definitely on building back better and making the islands resilient for the 
future.  
 
 
 
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 83 
 
   
 

 
the Netherlands to Sint Maarten. As concluded earlier, the vague wording of this article also caused 
uncertainties and delays in practice, because Article 36 does not specify the nature of such help 
and assistance. 
 
210. To be better prepared in the future – and to allow for quicker action in a potential crisis – the 
meaning and interpretation of Article 36 of the Statute should be carefully discussed within the 
Kingdom. It would also be beneficial to make better agreements between the various countries 
within the Kingdom regarding the preparation and submission of requests for assistance. This will 
result in quicker action being taken in emergency situations.  
 
211. In the case of Saba and Sint Eustatius, requests for assistance must be formally submitted via the 
Kingdom Representative, the administrative link between the Caribbean Netherlands and the 
European Netherlands. This was particularly difficult in the initial days of Irma, due to both 
communication issues and also to the distance to Bonaire (the location of the Kingdom 
Representative). In order to promote speed of action in emergency situations, it is desirable to 
consider how the process of requesting assistance in times of emergency can be optimized. As 
noted earlier, as a result of the evaluation of the Ministry of JenV on the system for the disaster 
management of hurricanes Irma, Jose and Maria, the coordination plan for supra-island disaster 
relief and crisis management on Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba was already adjusted in January 
2020. This mainly concerned sharpening and clarifying the roles, tasks and powers of the Saba, 
Sint Eustatius and Bonaire, the Kingdom Representative and the relationship with the European 
Netherlands. 
 
Recommendation 3 This evaluation found shortcomings in the data and document storage 
systems of the Ministry of BZK. The Ministry’s financial management and its document storage 
system, Digidoc, can be improved, with a view to enhancing accountability for disbursements. 
Specific guidelines and procedures should be developed in this regard and staff may have to be 
trained for this purpose.   
 
212. There is room for improvement in both financial and administrative documentation of disbursements 
made by the Ministry of BZK under Article 8. In financial overviews, labelling of disbursements 
needs to be more consistent and systematic, and ex-post corrections (due to exchange rate 
calculations or corrections of mistakes) need to be more systematically related to the respective 
budget lines. One would also expect that specific disbursements can be more easily linked to 
underlying administrative decisions/contractual agreements with implementing organisations, as 
well as narrative reporting related to the agreements. 
 
 
7.2 Emergency response 
Recommendation 4 The aftermath of Hurricane Irma highlighted the importance of coordination in 
the event of an emergency is crucial. Coordination should be improved, through better agreements 
in advance about the delineation of tasks and responsibilities between the various ministries in the 
event of a disaster in the Caribbean part of the Netherlands.  In preparation of hurricanes or other 
disasters that may occur in the future, the Ministry of BZK should further strengthen its capacities in 
assisting the islands in strengthening emergency preparedness, drawing up post disaster needs 
assessments and developing relief and reconstruction plans 
 
213. The Ministry of Defence plays a key role here, especially at the start of a calamity, due to the 
representation of Defence on Curacao and Aruba and the availability of manpower and material 
that can be deployed quickly. Over time, this responsibility is transferred to another ministry. In 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 85 
 
   
 

 
relatively small share of budget allocated to the early recovery projects, combined with the short 
timeline of six months, and the long set-up period of the Trust Fund resulted in a significant gap. A 
longer, more comprehensive early recovery phase would have been useful to further solidify social 
activities, especially considering the success of some projects and the effectiveness and value-for-
money of continuing running activities. A longer period might have also allowed a closer handover 
between early recovery projects and those later channelled through the Trust Fund.  
 
Recommendation 7: Some of the more successful projects in the early recovery phase were those 
implemented by local NGOs or organisations with running activities that could be expanded with 
early recovery funds. Betting on local know-how proved successful, and should be kept in mind in 
future similar scenarios.  
 
220. The projects in the early recovery phase were carried out by different types of organisations with 
different levels of presence and experience in Sint Maarten. Broadly speaking, the more successful 
interventions were those that built on ongoing activities and allowed organisations to establish 
realistic goals and meet these within the time period. Others were able to embed early recovery 
activities into their existing structure, allowing them to make use of their local relations and 
networks. Organisations with less experience on the island, had to significantly adjust its project 
targets across the programme, after finding out that several of the assumptions made at proposal 
stage did not hold. Local know-how, feet on the ground and established networks proved to be key 
elements for successful in the quick-win set-up of the early recovery phase, focused on smaller 
projects with shorter timelines. 
 
 
7.4 Reconstruction of Sint Eustatius and Saba  
Recommendation 8  The reconstruction projects were managed per ministry, which means that a 
clear overview is lacking and coordination between the various projects was made more difficult. It 
may be better to opt for a reconstruction programme for Saba and Sint Eustatius, like in Sint 
Maarten, with centralised management during the implementation phase. The coordinating role of 
the Ministry of BZK should be clarified and moved forward. 
 
221. For the BES islands, the relevant line ministries are responsible for the implementation of their own 
policy, just like in the Netherlands. In the event of a disaster such as Irma, it may be better to opt for 
a reconstruction programme for Saba and Sint Eustatius, like in Sint Maarten, with centralised 
management during the implementation phase. This could also include arranging financing from a 
budget item in the event of subsequent calamities. Funding for the reconstruction projects can now 
go partly through the budget of Article 8, but also through the budgets of the other ministries 
involved. This makes the reconstruction process more transparent and it is expected that the 
choices made can be better justified afterwards. The Ministry of BZK already takes the lead in 
centralised management in the event of a disaster on the BES islands. 
 
Recommendation 9 As the frequency and strength of hurricanes increases, it remains important to 
prevent potential damage in the future by using the principles of ‘building back better’.  
 
222. The Building Back Better principle is emphatically central to the reconstruction of Saba, Sint 
Eustatius and Sint Maarten. The approach integrates disaster risk reduction measures into the 
restoration of physical infrastructure, social systems and shelter, and the revitalization of 
151
livelihoods, economies and the environment. Examples of the principle include underground 
cables, panic rooms, concrete roofs and the relocation of essential infrastructure if possible.  
 
151
 United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 87 
 
   
 

 
Annex I: References 
Documents 
 
Algemene Rekenkamer (2018), Resultaten verantwoordingsonderzoek 2017 - Koninkrijksrelaties  
(IV) en BES-fonds (H) - Rapport bij het jaarverslag, Den Haag 
 
Eppinga, M.B. and Pucko C.A (2018), The impact of hurricanes Irma and Maria on the forest  
ecosystems of Saba and St. Eustatius, northern Caribbean, In: BiotropicaVolume 50, Issue 
5 p. 723-728. 
    
COT: Insitiuut voor Veiligheids en Crisismanagement (juli 2018), Evaluatie Nationale 
Crisisorganisatie Orkaan Irma, Rotterdam.   
 
Ministerie van BZK (14 September 2017), Nota Waiver procedure- inzake noodhulp orkaan Irma  
St. Maarten, Den Haag.  
 
Ministerie van BZK (mei 2018), Sint Maarten, Irma en BZK: evaluatie crisisbeheer ministerie van  
Binnenlandse Zaken, Den Haag. 
 
Ministerie van BZK, Vertegenwoordiging van Nederland Willemstad (Juli 2018), Verslag 
“Lessons learned” van het Crisis Ondersteuningsoverleg Curaçao. 
 
Ministerie van BZK (2021), Introductiedossier 2021 deel I., Den Haag. 
 
Ministerie van Defensie (mei 2020),  Evaluatie militaire inzet orkaan Irma 2017, Den Haag. 
 
Ministry of Infrastructure and Water Management (17 november 2017), Inventarisatie kosten 
noodhulp, Den Haag. 
   
Ministerie van Justitie & Veiligheid & Ministerie van BZK (juni 2020), Handboek 
 Crisisbeheersing  voor de Caribische delen van het Koninkrijk, Den Haag. 
 
Ministerie van Justitie en Veiligheid/ Inspectie Justitie en Veiligheid (mei 2018), Onderzoek 
naar het Systeem van rampenbestrijding op de BES-eilanden. Incidentenonderzoek naar  
aanleiding van de passage van de orkanen Irma, Jose en Maria. Den Haag.    
 
Instituut Fysieke Veiligheid (2018), Lessen uit crises en mini-crises 2017, Arnhem/ Zoetermeer.    
 
Pro Facto & University of Curacao (March 2022), Evaluatie Veiligheidswet BES. 
 
Red Cross, Final narrative Report NLRC School Meal Project 
 
Red Cross (October 2018),  From Waste to Work Final Report 
 
Red Cross (September 2021), Terugkoppeling 2017-2021 Nationale Actie ‘Nederland Helpt Sint  
Maarten’,  Den Haag. 
 
Qcredits. (December 20th 2017), Proposal ‘Ondersteuning MKB op Bovenwindse Eilanden bij 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 89 
 
   
 

 
Commissie van Wijzen, ‘Nabijheid of distantie, een wereld van verschil’. 5 februari 2018. 
 
Brief van de staatssecretaris van binnenlandse zaken en koninkrijksrelaties. Herstel van de 
voorzieningen in het bestuur van het openbaar lichaam Sint Eustatius (Wet herstel voorzieningen 
Sint Eustatius). Den Haag 31 mei 2021. 
 
Zesde voortgangsbrief wederopbouw St. Eustatius. 
 
Brief aan de Tweede Kamer, Betreft Septemberbrief Sint Eustatius. Kenmerk: 2019-0000489161 
 
3e uitvoeringsrapportage Statia. 
 
6e uitvoeringsrapportage Statia. 
 
 
Internet  
 
https://rijksbegroting.nl/beleidsevaluaties/evaluaties-en-beleidsdoorlichtingen/handreiking) 
 
https://www.defensie.nl/onderwerpen/historische-missies/missie-overzicht/2017/orkaan-irma  
 
https://www.trouw.nl/nieuws/mensonterende-gevangenis-op-sint-maarten-wordt-geholpen-met-
nederland-containercellen~b5c24823/ 
 
https://www.noordhollandsdagblad.nl/cnt/dmf20180921_56435137?utm_source=google&utm_medi
um=organic 
 
https://www.telegraaf.nl/nieuws/425366/scholen-op-sint-maarten-weer-open  
 
www.soualiganewsday.com/index.php?option=com_k2&view=item&id=18753:white-yellow-cross-
on-track-with-clients%E2%80%99-home-repair&Itemid=450 
 
https://stmaartennews.com/social/jollification-strengthen-restore-sense-wellbeing-sfpo/ 
 
https://www.rodekruis.nl/nieuwsbericht/iati/from-waste-to-work-startup-solutions-for-sint-maarten/  
 
https://nrpbsxm.org/esp/.  
 
https://smdf.sx/history/. 
 
https://bes-reporter.com/cliff-stabilization-project-fort-oranje-nears-completion/ 
 
https://www.thedailyherald.sx/islands/statia-cliff-protection-project-in-full-swing 
 
https://www.statiagovernment.com/news-and-tenders/news/2020/05/06/cliff-stabilization-project-
fort-oranje-nears-completion 
 
https://www.thedailyherald.sx/islands/statia-cliff-protection-project-in-full-swing 
 
https://www.jhtm.nl/statianews/bibliotheek/begrotingsuitvoering_2019_nr4.pdf 
 
https://zoek.officielebekendmakingen.nl/kst-34877-F.html 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 91 
 
   
 

 
152
Organisation Person Function 
Ministry of BZK Chris Johnson Vertegenwoordiger Nederland 
Sint Maarten 
Ministry of BZK Sanne Kouwenhoven Programmamanager Sint Maarten 
Ministry of BZK Sjoerd van Wetten Liaison Officer bij de Permanente 
Vertegenwoordiging van 
Nederland op Sint Maarten 
Ministry of BZK Lenneke Joosen-Parie Manager afdeling Veiligheid 
DGKR 
Ministry of BZK Celine Wijsman Manager afdeling Veiligheid 
DGKR 
Ministry of BZK Reza Tabatabaie Manager afdeling Economie en 
Financiën DGKR 
Ministry of BZK Saskia de Reuver Directeur Landen 
Koninkrijksrelaties DGKR 
Ministry of BZK Dirk Jan Bonnet Directeur Caribisch Nederland  
DGKR 
Ministry of BZK Frans Weekers Speciaal gezant BZK 
wederopbouw 
Ministry of BZK Hans Leijten Project-directeur-generaal 
Wederopbouw Bovenwindse 
Eilanden 
Ministry of BZK Hans van der Stelt Voormalig programmadirecteur 
wederopbouw 
Ministry of BZK Mirte Coppelman-De Vries NL vertegenwoordiging SXM 
Ministry of BZK Wim Bekker Beleidsmedewerker SXM bij 
DGKR 
Ministry of BZK Sjoerd van Meulen Senior Advisor Financial 
Economic Affairs 
Ministry of BZK Joris Knops BZK 
Ministry of BZK Erik van Borkulo BZK 
Ministry of Defence Bas Beijnvoort Noodhulp 
Ministry of Defence Roos Wagemaker Beleidsmedewerker 
wederopbouw SXM; noodhulp en 
early recovery 
Ministry of Finance Thijs Slippens Tijdelijk detachering naar 
Programma-organisatie 
Wederopbouw Bovenwindse 
Eilanden 
Ministry of Justice and Security Wouter Brand Nationaal Crisiscentrum (NCTV) 
Ministry of Justice and Security Koen Gerritse Crisis Coordination Advisor 
Ministry of Justice and Security Willy Steenbakkers Crisis Coordinator NCTV 
Ministry of Infrastructure and Anneke Tjalma Senior Advisor Ministry of 
Water Management Infrastructure and Environment 
NOS Matthijs van der Wiel Noodhulp 
Ministry of OWC Mirjam De Rijke  Programmamanager 
onderwijshuisvesting Caribisch 
Nederland 
Qredits Elwin Groeneveld CEO Qredits 
Dutch Representation SXM Robert Jan de Wilde NL vertegenwoordiging SXM 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 93 
 
   
 

 
Organisation Gesprekspersoon Function 
Sint Maarten Medical Centre Ingeborg Verwoerdt Project Manager 
(Hospital Resiliency & Felix Holiday Medical Director 
Preparedness Project)  
Project Management Unit  n.a. 
Stichting Katholiek Onderwijs M. Halley President  
Tanja Frederiks Project Manager 
VNG International Rolf Hunink Team Leader R4CR 
VNP - Dutch Representation Chris Johnson Head of the Representation 
Office in Sint Maarten Erwin Arkenbout Representative of the 
Netherlands 
White Yellow Cross Care Bregje Boetekees Operations Manager 
Foundation 
Table 1c Interviews Saba 
Organisation Gesprekspersoon Function 
Fort Bay Harbour Project Ton van der Plas Project Manager 
Planning Bureau Department Bobby Zagers Head of Planning Bureau 
Saba Executive Council Tim Muller Island Secretary 
Saba Executive Council Piet Gerritsen Policy Advisor 
 
Table 1d Interviews St Eustatius  
Organisation Gesprekspersoon Function 
Public Entity St. Eustatius  Joury Ranzijn Program Project Office – Project 
Manager 
Public Entity St. Eustatius  Mel Raboen dé Sánchez Pacheco Change Manager Cabinet 
Government Commissioner 
Crisis team Multiple persons Full list of members to be 
included in Final Report upon 
confirmation by contact persons 
in Sint Eustatius.  
 
 
  
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 95 
 
   
 

 
Annex II: Evaluation matrix  
Table 0.1 Evaluation matrix for Part I – Emergency assistance across the three islands and early recovery Sint Maarten  
EQ # Evaluation question Short description Find 
Three phases are included in this report:  § 1.3 
1 Which parts of policies of the Government of the Netherlands 
• Emergency response  
aiming at emergency assistance, early recovery and 
• Early Recovery of St. Maarten 
reconstruction in the wake of 2017 hurricanes in the Leeward 
• Reconstruction of Sint Eustatius and Saba 
Islands (Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations) are 
 
covered by the present policy reviews? 
2 How are other relevant parts of policies mentioned in Evaluation • The reconstruction of Sint Maarten is included in a separate report § 1.3 
Question 1 addressed by the current policy reviews? evaluated by Lucien Bäck (Part II).  
3 What was the motivation behind the policy of the Government of • The intervention logic is included. § 2.1 and § 3.2 
the Netherlands for the emergency assistance of the three • Sint Maarten is an autonomous country within the Kingdom and has 
islands under Article 8 Part I? What is its current relevance? had its own responsibility in the event of calamities and disasters 
 since the administrative reforms of 2010. However, under the Statute 
for the Kingdom of the Netherlands (Article 36) the four countries 
provide aid and assistance to each other when needed.  
• Saba and Sint Eustatius have both been a special municipality since 
2010. The Ministry of BZK also has this coordinating role in the event 
of a crisis or calamity for the provision of aid and assistance to the 
islands. 
• The structure of the Emergency Response is still relevant. 
4.a What is  the responsibility of the Government of the Netherlands See above. § 2.1 and § 3.2 
for emergency assistance in the three islands in the context of 
the Statute of Kingdom Relations? 
4.b Which have been the responsibilities of the Governments of the See above. § 2.1 and § 3.2 
three islands for providing emergency assistance, in the context 
of the Statute of Kingdom Relations? 
 
 
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 97 
 
   

 
EQ # Evaluation question Short description Find 
9 To what extent is there sufficient documentary evidence to • The evaluations performed mainly provide a qualitative picture based § 2.3 
assess the effectiveness and efficiency of the emergency on (internal) interviews. Hard statements about effectiveness and 
assistance provided under Article 8 Part I? efficiency are usually lacking in the evaluations carried out. 
10.a How effective has the emergency support provided by the • Emergency response is provided immediately after a (natural) § 4.1 – 4.6 
Government of the Netherlands in Saba, Sint Eustatius and Sint disaster, crisis or violent conflict and aims to save lives and protect 
Maarten under Article 8.2 been in terms of outputs, outcomes those directly affected and provide them with basic necessities. 
and impact? Have there been positive or negative side-effects? • In the case of Irma, the emergency assistance was largely based on 
 damage assesments and the many and specified requests for 
assistance from the local authorities. 
• The help and support provided during the emergency response 
phase was effective in the sense that almost all requests for help 
assistance were met. However, the effectiveness of the provided 
support would have greatly benefited from a more streamlined 
process, linking clear damage assessments to requests for 
assistance and ensuring better communication between those 
witnessing the situation on the island and those doing the processing 
of requests for assistance.     
10.b. On what basis were the projects undertaken during the early • To ensure a responsible and efficient use of the funds destined for § 5.1  
recovery phase under Article 8 Part I chosen? Were these these projects, the Ministry of BZK chose to assign as implementing 
decisions based on the actual needs? parties International organizations (e.g. UNDP) and NGOs. 
 • particularly those already active on the ground and with existing links 
to ongoing activities under the emergency response.  
• Invited organisations were seen as being best placed to identify 
urgent needs and their own capacity to deliver results for the 
duration of the Early Recovery timeline. 
 11 What was the justification for expenditure under Article 8 in • In view of the need to act quickly, a modified (and more efficient) § 3.5 
terms of volume / use and standards / prices? waiver procedure has been developed by the Ministry of BZK for 
 emergency assistance requests.   
• Despite the commitment that the Ministry of BZK covered the 
emergency assistance costs incurred by other departments, it was 
determined in advance that the relevant departments themselves 
were responsible for the lawful application of the procurement law . 
 
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 99 
 
   

 
EQ # Evaluation question Short description Find 
however, not sufficient to lay the necessary conditions for 
reconstruction efforts.  
• The significant standstill of social activities between the early 
recovery project and reconstruction activities created a risk of further 
deterioration of conditions.  
15 Which lessons can be learnt for similar future crisis situations Governance and design Chapter 7 
caused by hurricanes? • Recommendation 1 The aftermath of Hurricane Irma highlighted 
 the importance of swift action. Although the three islands have an 
existing disaster structure, it is desirable to further optimize the way 
these structures are implemented in practice and the way they 
coordinate between each other and with the other actors in the 
Kingdom. 
• Recommendation 2 Requests for assistance are an important 
instrument in providing mutual assistance between the countries 
within the Kingdom of the Netherlands and between the BES 
islands and the European part of the Netherlands. This instrument 
could be improved through a more careful discussion of the 
interpretation of Article 36 of the Statute and clear agreements 
between the various countries within the Kingdom regarding the 
preparation and submission of requests for assistance. 
• Recommendation 3 This evaluation found shortcomings in the 
data and document storage systems of the Ministry of BZK. The 
Ministry’s financial management and its document storage system, 
Digidoc, can be improved, with a view to enhancing accountability 
for disbursements. 
 
 
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 101 
 
   

 
Table 0.2 Evaluation matrix for Part III - Reconstruction Efforts in Saba and Sint Eustatius. 
EQ Evaluation question Short description St. Eustatius Saba 
# 
General questions  
• Coordination by Ministry of the Interior 
1 Which parts of policies of the Government § 2.1  & § 3.4 § 2.1  & § 3.4 
• Funding provided by the Ministry of BZK from Article 8 to 
of the Netherlands aiming at emergency 
Saba and Sint Eustatius 
assistance, early recovery and 
• Additional funding provided by other departments 
reconstruction in the wake of 2017 
hurricanes in the Leeward Islands (Article 8 
of the Budget for Kingdom Relations) are 
covered by the present policy reviews? 
 
2 How are other relevant parts of policies • Goals are in line with other policies  § 1.3 &  §2.1 § 1.3 &  §2.1 
mentioned in Evaluation Question 1 • The reconstruction of Sint Maarten is included in a 
addressed by the current policy reviews? separate report evaluated by Lucien Bäck (Part II). 
 
3 What was the motivation behind the policy • Obligations for the Netherlands arising from the Statute of § 3.4 § 3.4 
of the Government of the Netherlands for Kingdom Relations. 
the reconstruction of Saba and Sint • Request for assistance were sent from Saba and Sint 
Eustatius under Article 8 Part III? What is its Eustatius. 
current relevance? • Disposals (beschikkingen) were sent to the islands. 
 • Positions expressed in statements and letters by the NL 
Parliament (kamerstukken) since 2017. 
 
4 What is  the responsibility of the • The reconstruction of Saba and Sint Eustatius is § 3.4 and § 3.5 § 3.4 and § 3.5 
Government of the Netherlands for coordinated  by the Minister of BZK. In addition to the 
reconstruction in Saba and Sint Eustatius in Ministry of BZK, the Ministries of Education, Culture and 
the context of the Statute of Kingdom Science (OCW), Economic Affairs and Climate (EZK) and 
Relations? Infrastructure and Water Management (IenW) are also 
 involved in the reconstruction. The resources for these 
projects are included in the budgets of the Ministries of 
BZK, OCW, EZK and IenW.  
 
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 103 
 
   

 
EQ Evaluation question Short description St. Eustatius Saba 
# 
conducted, how has the policy been 
evaluated and for which reasons? 
8 Which parts of the reconstruction policy • No earlier evaluations took place.  § 2.3 § 2.3 
under Article 8 Part III have not been 
evaluated (yet)?  
 
9 To what extent is there sufficient • The documentation provided by the ministry of BZK on the § 2.3 § 2.3 
documentary evidence to assess the reconstruction of Sint Eustatius and Saba is limited 
effectiveness and efficiency of the • Assessment was done based on other documentation, 
reconstruction policy under Article 8 Part II? interviews and field visits.  
 
Effectiveness  
10.a To what extent have projects undertaken • All projects that were initiated under Article 8 are finished;  § 6.2 § 6.3  
during the reconstruction activities in Saba • Projects were assessed as being effective by the evaluator. 
and Sint Eustatius? How effective was this?  
 
10.b To what extent have the objectives of the • All projects that were initiated under Article 8 are finished; § 6.2 § 6.3 
reconstruction policy of the Government of • Projects were assessed as being effective by the evaluator. 
the Netherlands aiming at reconstruction in • No negative side effects have been found 
Saba and Sint Eustatius been realized? 
Have there been positive or negative side-
effects? 
 
Building back better  
11.a. How has “building back better” been • Damage assessments have been made.  § 6.2 § 6.3 
realized in terms of improved physical • Structures are improved in comparison with the situation 
infrastructure? before Irma and Maria.  
• “Building back better” is been realized 
11.b How has “building back better” been • No projects were aiming at this point from Article 8.    
realized in terms of crisis and disaster  
 
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 105 
 
   

 
EQ Evaluation question Short description St. Eustatius Saba 
# 
available (20 % more or less than • Assessment of the situation that would have prevailed with 
budgeted)? 20 % more funding 
 
Looking forward  
15 Which measures can be taken to enhance Reconstruction of Sint Eustatius and Saba  § 7.4 § 7.4 
effectiveness and efficiency of • Recommendation 8  The reconstruction projects were 
reconstruction policies in Saba and Sint managed per ministry, which means that a clear overview is 
Eustatius? lacking and coordination between the various projects was made 
more difficult. It may be better to opt for a reconstruction 
programme for Saba and Sint Eustatius, like in Sint Maarten, 
with centralised management during the implementation phase. 
The coordinating role of the Ministry of BZK should be clarified. 
• Recommendation 9 As the frequency and strength of 
hurricanes increases, it becomes increasingly important to 
prevent potential damage in the future by building back better.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 107 
 
   

 
 
 
 
Policy Review of Article 8 of the Budget for Kingdom Relations 109 
 
   
 



