The Netherlands and the European Development Fund - Principles and practices
IOB Evaluation | no. 375
IOB Evaluation
The Netherlands and the  
European Development Fund - 
Principles and practices 
Evaluation of Dutch involvement in  
EU development cooperation (1998-2012)
The Netherlands and the European Development Fund - Principles and practices | Evaluation of Dutch involvement in EU development cooperation (1998-2012) | IOB Evaluation | no. 375 | The Netherlands and the European Development Fund - Principles and practices | Evaluation of Dutch involvement in EU development cooperation (1998-2012) | IOB Evaluation | no. 375 | The Netherland



Preface
development cooperation in the period 2000-2010 and - based on the findings of this policy 
evaluation - gain lessons for future policy development and implementation. 
The report was written by Paul G.de Nooijer of IOB. He was supported by Cheshta Baboeram 
Panday as research assistant and a Berenschot - SEE research team. Internal quality support 
was provided by Antonie de Kemp and Ted Kliest.  A reference group, chaired by Henri 
Jorritsma of IOB, has given advice. Members were Pieter Stek, former governor of the 
Netherlands at the World Bank, Paul Engel and Niels Keijzer of the European Centre for 
Development Policy Management (ECDPM), Martyn Pennington, head of the European 
Commission’s Joint Evaluation Unit, and Pieter Jan Kleijweg de Zwaan, Heleen Bakker and 
Robert van Dijk of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
Prof. dr. Ruerd Ruben
Director Policy and Operations Evaluation Department (IOB)
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, The Netherlands
| 4 |

Table of Contents
Part II   128
4  Aid management reform – focus on Brussels 130
 Introduction 131
4.1  Reforming aid management – the May 2000 reform agenda 131
4.2  Creation of EuropeAid  132
4.3  Post-Lisbon reforms  133
4.4  Aid Monitoring & Evaluation  141
4.5  Transparency 145
 Summary of main findings 148
5 Aid management at Delegation level 150
 Introduction 151
5.1  The devolution process 151
5.2  The current state of affairs 152
5.3  Is devolution achieving what was intended? 157
 Summary of main findings 159
6 Financial matters 160
 Introduction 161
| 6 | 6.1  Internal supervision and control 161
6.2  Internal financial management and reporting 162
6.3  Ensuring external financial scrutiny 164
 Summary of main findings 168
Part III   170
7 EDF’s national programmes 172
 Introduction 173
7.1. Aid programming main principles 173
7.2  Implementing the programming principles 176
7.3   Sector focus at country level and the issue of  
comparative advantage/added value 183
7.4  Results 187
7.5  (Net) Outcomes 209
7.6  Political dialogue and appropriate measures 211
 Summary of main findings 215
8 ACP regional programmes 218
 Introduction 219
8.1  The importance of regional cooperation and integration 219
8.2  Regional cooperation and integration and the Cotonou Agreement 220
8.3  Regional programmes 222
8.4  Results of regional programmes 225
8.5  The Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) and trade 230
 Summary of main findings 237

List of Text Boxes, tables and figures
List of Text Boxes, Tables and Figures
Text Boxes
Text Box 1.1 Legal basis of EU external aid 53
Text Box 1.2 The Yaoundé and Lomé conventions (1964-2000) 56
Text Box 1.3 The Cotonou Agreement – Article 1: Objectives of the partnership 59
Text Box 1.4 The budgetisation debate 65
Text Box 1.5 The European 0.7% debate 68
Text Box 1.6 Responsibilities of the EDF Committee (2007) 79
Text Box 2.1 The Netherlands issues paper on GBS 92
Text Box 2.2 The Dutch position on trade and agriculture 94
Text Box 2.3 Effective multilateralism 97
Text Box 3.1 Basics of the Joint Statement on the European Community’s Development Policy 103
Text Box 3.2 Key elements of the European Consensus 106
Text Box 3.3 The 11 principles of the EU Code of Conduct on Division of Labour 109
Text Box 3.4 Twelve priority areas for policy coherence for development 113
Text Box 3.5 Findings on PCD in Commission country evaluations 115
Text Box 3.6 The Dutch position on the green paper on budget support 120
Text Box 3.7 Main elements of the Council Conclusions of May 2012 on budget support  122
| 8 | Text Box 4.1 The Lisbon Treaty on international affairs 132
Text Box 4.2 Diverging Member State views on the EEAS 136
Text Box 4.3 The HRVP’s proposal on the EEAS 137
Test Box 4.4 EDF Reviews 141
Text Box 5.1 Staffing of EU Delegations in four case study countries 155
Text Box 7.1  Main criteria for country allocations under the EDF 175
Text Box 7.2 Managing budget support in Uganda 194
Text Box 7.3 Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Nets Programme  210
Text Box 8.1 Aid for Trade 224
Text Box 8.2 Existing regional structures 227
Text Box 8.3 Main issues in unsuccessful EPA negotiations 234
Text Box 8.4 Everything But Arms 235
Text Box 9.1 Dutch views on the African Peace Facility 247
Tables
Table 1.1 9th, 10th and proposed 11th EDF by component (in EUR mln) 70
 
Table 1.2  EDF disbursements in the period 2000-2011 (in EUR  mln)
 73
Table 1.3  EDF funding (decisions, assigned funds and disbursements) under the Cotonou  
Agreement until 2011 (in EUR  mln) 74
Table 1.4 EDF country-level disbursements according to country income level (in EUR  mln)  75
Table 1.5 EDF commitments per sector in the period 2005-2011 (in EUR  mln) 76
Table 2.1 Preferred sector focus of EU aid according to successive Dutch ministers   
and state secretaries for development cooperation 88
Table 4.1 ROM implementation 2002-2010 in ACP countries 142
Table 4.2 Evaluations commissioned by the JEU in the period 2000 – 2011 144
Table 7.1 Country programmes by sector and resource allocation (Envelope A) (in EUR mln)  184

Acronyms and abbreviations
Acronyms and abbreviations
ACP African Caribbean and Pacific
AIV Advisory Council for International Affairs
APF African Peace Facility
AU African Union
BNC  Beoordeling Nieuwe Commissievoorstellen (Assessment new Commission proposals)
CFSP Common Foreign and Security Policy
COREPER Comité des Représentants Permanents
CSP Country Strategy Paper
DCI Development Cooperation Instrument
DEVCO Directorate General for Development and Cooperation 
DG Directorate General
DGDEV Directorate General for Development
DIE Department Integration Europe (N etherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
DIE/EX External Unit of the department Integration Europe
DRC Democratic Republic of Congo
EC European Community
ECHO European Commission Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection 
| 10 | ECU European Currency Unit
EDF European Development Fund
EEAS European External Action Service
EEC European Economic Community
EIB European Investment Bank
EIDHR European Instrument for Democracy & Human Rights
ENLARG Directorate General Enlargement
ENP European Neighbourhood Policy
ENPI European Neighbourhood Policy Instrument
EP European Parliament
EPA Economic Partnership Agreement
ESDP European Security and Defence Policy
EU European Union
EuropeAid Europe Aid Co-operation Office
FAFA Financial and Administrative Framework Agreement
FAO Food and Agriculture Organisation
GBS General Budget Support
GFATM Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria
GNI Gross National Income
HIPC Highly Indebted Poor Countries
HRVP High Representative for F oreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President  
of the Commission
ICT Information Communication Technologies
IfS Instrument for Stability
ILO International Labour Organisation
iQSG Inter service quality support group



Summary and conclusions 
complementarity of EU aid vis-à-vis Dutch bilateral aid has changed quite frequently. 
Though it was repeatedly stated that the EU should focus more, the Netherlands has not 
hesitated to put its own priorities on the European aid agenda. In the absence of clear 
definitions of complementarity or added value, Dutch views on areas where the EU aid 
should focus have been guided by a (combination of ) four considerations: (i) the 
Commission was (supposed to be) ‘good’ in these areas; (ii) the Netherlands was not 
involved or the preferred areas also represented Dutch bilateral aid priorities; (iii) the 
Commission was virtually the only European actor with sufficient resources to have impact, 
and (iv) because of its ‘political neutrality’, the Commission had more (political) leverage 
for addressing issues of good governance, judicial reform and human rights.
The Dutch role in the design of EU aid policies and treaties with the ACP 
countries
According to Dutch priorities, the ultimate aim of EU aid ought to be sustainable poverty 
reduction or alleviation. In line with the core principles of the Maastricht Treaty, EU aid had 
to focus on the least developed countries (LDCs).  At the same time, successive Dutch 
governments have advocated for an EU role in the not-so-poor countries at the Union’s 
borders and for support to the poor living in low and middle-income countries in Asia and 
Latin America. Moreover, particular attention had to be paid to the security-development 
| 14 | nexus, especially in Africa. The Netherlands also stressed that the EU has a particular 
mandate in dealing with policy coherence for development, focusing on the coherence 
between development aid and the Union’s policies on agriculture and fisheries, trade, 
environment (2001-2009) as well as migration, employment, energy and peace and security 
(2004-2009). Since the Policy note ‘Kwaliteit van de Europese Hulp’ of 1999, the Netherlands has 
put emphasis on improving the quality of EU development aid. Aid quality was a broad 
term, covering also issues like the fragmentation and centralisation of aid management, 
the sluggishness of the aid system and the lack of information on results. In more recent 
times, the provision of general budget support by the Commission has dominated the 
Dutch agenda. Positions were initially synchronised; however, from 2008 onwards Dutch 
views on general budget support have become more critical
The evaluation shows that both the generic EU aid policies that have been agreed upon 
since 2000 and the Cotonou Agreement contain the same priorities that characterize Dutch 
bilateral aid policies: ownership, poverty focus and working towards the MDGs, integration 
of political aspects and European and Dutch values referred to above, as well as the 
attention for policy coherence for development. Like other Member States, the Netherlands 
has fully participated in the design of EU aid policies and eventually agreed upon all these 
policies at Council level. 
The need for reform of Brussels’ comitology, i.e. away from micro management and scrutiny 
of individual projects and programmes, has been debated for many years. However, little 
has changed as is obvious from OECD’s peer review of 2012. The prime responsibility for this 
situation is with the Member States. The  Netherlands for example, irrespective of its earlier 
desires to reform, continues to announce that it will follow approvals of country 
programmes and projects closely and will object on a case-by-case basis to proposals on 

Summary and conclusions 
Tuberculosis and Malaria and the Fast Track Initiative for education. This is far less the case 
for the regional programmes with their emphasis on support for regional economic 
integration. 
The importance of ownership in EU aid
The evaluation shows that Country Strategy Papers are developed in consultation with 
partner countries and are usually closely linked with their poverty reduction strategies. 
Consultations focus on national government institutions, with the Planning and Finance 
Ministries that are home to the National Authorising Officers (NAOs) taking a pivotal role. 
The involvement of other national actors, including parliament, civil society and private 
sector is more limited, despite EU efforts to engage them. The situation differs from country 
to country, depending amongst others on central Government politics, the strength of the 
position of these other institutions vis-à-vis the central Government and their institutional 
capacity, which is often still limited, despite the efforts made to strengthen them. At the 
same time, in response to desires from the European Parliament and/or the Member States 
a series of facilities and trust funds was established under the EDF in water, energy and 
infrastructure that have remained outside the national programming process and are 
implemented through calls for proposals. 
| 16 | The Netherlands and Commission views on budget support 
Until the Agenda for Change of 2011, the agreement at EU level was that budget support, 
whenever possible, was – for various reasons – the preferred aid modality. This is e.g. 
evident from the European Consensus of 2005, a range of Council conclusions, as well as 
Council guidelines for Accra of 2008. Until 2008, this position was in line with the Dutch 
position that the Commission ought to move away from the traditional projects and 
programmes on the condition that the eligibility criteria for budget support of the Cotonou 
Agreement were met. Consequently, a considerable part of EDF has been used to provide 
either general or sector budget support. Between 2002 and 2010, expenditures on general 
budget support under the EDF have more than doubled, increasing from €465 million to 
€970 million, totalling some €5.2 billion during this period. Sector budget support 
commitments have summed to some €2 billion in the period 2003-2010. With few 
exceptions, this support was provided together with either EU Member States and/or other 
donors, in particular the World Bank. 
In terms of results, evaluations refer specifically to the contribution of general budget 
support to maintaining and increasing Government spending in social sectors, a certain 
reduction of fiscal deficits and improvements in public financial management and 
statistical systems. Moreover, it has enabled the Union to contribute to the development of 
specific sector policies, though, as observed by the European Court of Auditors, Delegations 
did not always have the necessary staff for doing so. On a more critical side, the European 
Court of Auditors has repeatedly raised concern with regards to (i) the flexible way in which 
the Commission, like e.g. the World Bank, has dealt with the interpretation of the eligibility 
criteria of the Cotonou Agreement, especially with respect to weaknesses in public finance 
management, (ii) insufficient monitoring of public finance reforms; (iii) the weak quality of 
th
budget support agreements, though improving under the 10 EDF, (iv) the lack of realism of 

Summary and conclusions 
The importance of the security-development nexus has been recognised at the European 
level – including the European Security and Defence Policy of 2003. The Cotonou 
Agreement included provisions on the issue that were reinforced in its revisions of 2005 and 
2010. In operational terms, this has been translated into the establishment of the Africa 
Peace Facility (2003), an initiative that was welcomed by the Netherlands. This has been 
regarded as one of the more successful initiatives under the intra-ACP component of the 
EDF, though its long-term funding remains a concern. 
The added value or complementarity of EU aid 
The Lisbon Treaty did not change earlier agreements from the Maastricht Treaty of 1992: 
development cooperation remains a shared responsibility of Union and Member States. The 
lack of clarity on the meaning of the concepts of ‘added value’ or ‘complementarity’ in 
debates on the division of labour and the focus of EU and bilateral aid programmes have 
remained. Policy documents that have been agreed upon since 2000, including the 
European Consensus of 2005, have not been of helpful to make matters clearer.  They 
provide a long list of areas in which Community aid ought to have comparative advantages – 
i.e. from trade to employment – without clarifying who should do what. The question what 
the Commission is supposed to do, if it is not to be just another European donor, has never 
been clearly answered.
| 18 |
Moreover Commission evaluations show that there is no communis opinio on specific sectors 
in which the EU would have specific added value or whether and how it could derive this 
added value from its position as ‘fédérateur’ in ensuring cooperation between the 
Commission and the Member States. Most frequently, the volume of EU aid is considered as 
its main added value, as more money allowed – at times – having more influence on sector 
policies and producing more visible and effective results as in the case of budget support. 
Added value was furthermore derived from continued presence of the Union and the fact 
that it was not tied to particular national interests. 
Still, since 2000, it has been agreed that EU aid should focus on a limited number of areas in 
which it would have a comparative advantage or added value – the same would be true for 
the Member States’ bilateral aid. So far, this has not been translated into practice – neither 
by the Member States, nor by the Commission.  In reality, EU country programmes often 
include general budget support and a limited number of broadly defined focal sectors and 
even broader non-focal sectors. The same is true for a country like the Netherlands, which 
opted in 2010 to focus on sectors in which the Netherlands was supposedly good. Apart 
from road infrastructure, both Commission and Member States attempt to find their niche 
in the same sectors – where they continue to meet frequently in the many coordination 
mechanisms that exist at country level.  From the EU side, the notion of limited sector focus 
is furthermore affected by the fact that the above thematic instruments and facilities are not 
part of the country programming exercise.  Synergies between these different EU aid 
instruments are not always evident. There is also a less than optimal relationship between 
the different EDF instruments and the Investment Facility. 

Summary and conclusions 
diversification, with the bulk still consisting of raw materials, mineral fuels (oil and gas) and 
most countries still dependent on a few commodities and (e) only very few countries, 
including South Africa, accounting for the bulk of ACP exports to the EU.
Aid management reforms
An EU aid management reform agenda was introduced at the start of the new Millennium. It 
comprised the establishment of EuropeAid, the strengthening of (financial) management, 
internal control and oversight functions and, in parallel, the devolution of aid management 
tasks to the EU Delegations.  While policy matters related to the ACP countries remained 
with other Directorates General, the creation of EuropeAid meant the integration of the 
entire aid operations cycle (from programming to evaluation) into one organisation. A 
quality control function was set up to improve aid programming by the EU Delegations. 
Though this function appears to have functioned to a certain extent, programme design 
constraints continue to be observed, e.g. in relation to general budget support and regional 
programmes. 
With the Lisbon Treaty, important changes have taken place in the management set-up in 
Brussels in 2010 and 2011: the establishment of the position of HRVP and the creation of the 
European External Action Service (EEAS) and the Directorate General for Development and 
| 20 | Cooperation (DEVCO). At country level, Delegations have become EU Delegations, 
representing the Union in its entirety – not solely the Commission. Though it is too recent 
to give a final opinion on what has been accomplished, a series of issues has transpired in 
terms of (a) need for an overall EU foreign relations strategy, (b) staffing of the EEAS by 
Member State diplomats, and (c) demarcating responsibilities between the EEAS and other 
DGs with an external mandate (especially as regards policy coherence for development) 
both in Brussels and at country level.  
Devolution implied that aid management tasks moved away from Brussels and closer to the 
EU Delegations in ‘the field’. However, not all decisions have been devolved: delegations 
have authority over individual financial decisions but approvals of country programmes and 
changes therein and the release of budget support payments remained centralised. In the 
devolution process, over 1,550 staff posts were transferred to Delegations and their 
contracts and finance sections were established or strengthened. By 2009, 70% of 
Commission aid staff was working outside Brussels.  Delegations are expected to monitor 
aid implementation together with national authorities, including the NAOs. The limited 
capacity of the NAO offices remains a concern, requiring additional effort from the 
Delegations. Whether Delegations have the right level of staffing has been subject of 
continuous debate. In terms of staffing, the Commission had to operate in a zero-growth 
environment that was insisted upon by the Member States, despite increasing aid budgets. 
At the same time, problems are experienced in terms of high vacancy rates (especially in 
fragile states), nominating large numbers of agents temporaries, and limitations for getting 
staff with the required professional background and experience instead of generalists as 
asked for by the Member States. Getting more people in EU Delegations through the EEAS 
has not solved staffing constraints, neither do the increased demands from Member States 
such as the Netherlands to make EU Delegations responsible for other, non-aid matters (like 

Summary and conclusions 
Monitoring and evaluation
In terms of changes in monitoring and evaluation, a Results Oriented Monitoring (ROM) 
system was introduced to allow externally contracted experts to make ‘snapshot’ 
assessments of aid implementation. The system focuses on individual projects and its 
usefulness for reporting on aggregate levels is doubtful. 
A Joint Evaluation Unit (JEU) was set up within EuropeAid to handle all ‘strategic’ aid 
evaluations. The call for a completely independent external aid evaluation service has not 
been honoured, even though the Unit is not subordinate to management, operational or 
policy departments. Member States’ emphasis on evaluation has not been translated into 
making more resources available.  Relative to the volume of EU aid, the JEU remains 
modest, both in terms of staffing and budget, and important components of the EDF 
(including e.g. the Facilities under the Intra ACP envelope) have not yet been evaluated. At 
the same time, the JEU has played an important role in developing methods for the 
evaluation of general budget support and in promoting joint evaluations. The JEU, focusing 
on more strategic evaluations, has no oversight over decentralized evaluations done 
elsewhere in the system. The Commission’s management response system, in terms of 
follow-up given to evaluations, has been found not to function optimally.
Transparency
| 22 | The importance of transparency on aid flows, both from an aid effectiveness perspective 
and from the perspective of keeping the EU taxpayer informed on results, is increasingly 
recognised. The Commission has improved in this respect and a host of documents (policy 
documents, annual reports, audits, tendering files, JEU evaluation reports, etc.) are now 
publicly available through Internet. Moreover, the Commission, like the Netherlands, has 
joined the Aid Transparency Initiative. On transparency, the Commission therefore scores 
relatively well. At the same time, many of these sources provide little information and 
analysis on aid results and impact. Availability of public information at ACP country level 
(decentralised evaluations, annual reports, reviews, etc.) is still rather limited. 
The political dialogue 
The Netherlands and the Council have repeatedly stressed the importance of the political 
aspects of the Cotonou Agreement and of the Article 8 political dialogue between the EU 
and the ACP countries. This dialogue was to cover a broad range of topics, including but not 
limited to respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, democratic principles and 
the rule of law and good governance. At country level, opinions differ on the quality of the 
political dialogue and the forcefulness with which it was and could be conducted. Some 
confirm that it has been weak or non-existent in countries like Angola, Chad, Eritrea, 
Ethiopia, Djibouti, Lesotho, Malawi, Senegal, or Tanzania, while others are more positive, 
examples are Liberia, Rwanda, and, to a certain extent, Uganda. Moreover, it is evident that 
the dialogue is more successful when conducted by EU Delegation and Member States in 
union. Nevertheless, there has been little systematic research on what the Article 8 political 
dialogue has meant in practice and what the results have been Findings of the country 
evaluations that report on this dialogue are variable. Occasionally it has led to positive 
results (e.g. the adoption of a new law on media reform in Rwanda).

Summary and conclusions 
States in relation to the political side of the Cotonou Agreement, contributes little to 
strengthen a potentially influential Europe aid programme.
•	 The Dutch view on complementarity and added value of EU aid has changed quite frequently
The issue of complementarity or added value of EU aid in relation to Dutch bilateral aid and 
whether the EU is just another European bilateral donor and/or has to play a coordinating 
role, has been subject of continuous debate. However, without coming to a clear-cut 
position. The Netherlands position on what the Commission’s sector-wise priorities ought 
to be, has altered frequently – reflecting the different priorities of the seven governments of 
different political signature that were in place in the period 1998-2012. In line with a more 
consistent position of the Netherlands, road infrastructure and peace and conflict have 
been key areas in which the EU has been active, while for rural development this has been 
considerably less so. Whereas regional integration has been considered the natural habitat 
for the EU, the limited results it has realised so far in this area merit urgent attention.
Attempts to enhance EU coordination and cooperation at country level and to demarcate a 
limited number of sectors have so far not been very successful. Little was undertaken 
‘jointly’, an exception being general budget support. Though information exchange has 
improved and at country level a host of coordination and consultation mechanisms is in 
| 24 | place, little account was taken of EU interventions in the programming of Dutch aid. 
Division of labour and sector focus, as well as ownership on the side of the ACP countries, 
have not been enhanced by EU policy statements that refer to the comparative advantages 
of Community as a whole, broad sector definitions, and the introduction of special 
thematic budget lines and a wide range of EDF facilities. 
•	 Dutch and Commission views on budget support have become increasingly harmonised
During the evaluation period, the Netherlands has changed its position on how the EU 
should use the instrument of general budget support. It has changed its view, despite the 
fact that research shows that general budget support  has done little, if anything, to improve 
governance, address corruption or violation of human rights or having fair elections. This 
was only the case when there was already a commitment to change in the partner countries. 
The Netherlands has influenced recent EU policy-making on the instrument. The thinking 
was that less EU budget support would allow for cuts to be made in EU aid. Whether the new 
EU policy on budget support will be able to address the development challenges it is 
supposed to tackle remains to be seen.
•	 Although EDF has a clear poverty focus, little is still known about actual results.
The political emphasis on poverty and the poverty focus of EDF country programmes has to 
a certain extent also been translated into concrete actions directly aimed at poverty 
reduction. More successful in this respect have been the interventions in health and 
education, which were also supported by EU funding for global initiatives and through the 
provision of general budget support. For other key sectors, where the poverty focus is more 
indirect (e.g. roads and support for the African Peace Facility), evidence is more mixed or 
not clear in the absence of rigorous impact evaluation. Overall, main concerns relate to 



Samenvatting en conclusies 
mensenrechten en de rechtsstaat te bevorderen en krachtiger te kunnen optreden in grote 
mondiale vraagstukken als armoede, veiligheid, fragiele staten, klimaatverandering, vrije 
en eerlijke handel en migratie. Nederland meende via de Unie meer voor zichzelf te kunnen 
bereiken dan met solistisch optreden. Toch heeft het zijn opvattingen over de meerwaarde 
of complementariteit van de communautaire ontwikkelingshulp ten opzichte van de 
Nederlandse bilaterale hulp nogal eens gewijzigd. Hoewel herhaaldelijk werd verkondigd 
dat de EU gerichter te werk moest gaan, aarzelde Nederland niet zijn eigen prioriteiten op 
de Europese hulpagenda te plaatsen. Omdat heldere definities van complementariteit of 
meerwaarde ontbraken, baseerde Nederland zich bij de vraag op welke gebieden de 
communautaire hulp gericht moest zijn op (een combinatie van) vier overwegingen: (i) de 
Commissie presteerde sterk op die gebieden (of werd geacht dat te doen); (ii) Nederland was 
er niet bij betrokken, of de voorkeursgebieden betroffen ook prioriteiten voor de 
Nederlandse bilaterale hulp; (iii) de Commissie was nagenoeg de enige Europese speler met 
voldoende middelen om effect te sorteren; en (iv) als ‘politiek neutrale’ instelling had de 
Commissie meer (politieke) macht om kwesties rond goed bestuur, justitiële hervorming en 
mensenrechten aan de orde te stellen.
De rol van Nederland bij de uitwerking van EU-ontwikkelingshulpbeleid en verdragen met de ACS-landen
Op de prioriteitenlijst van Nederland stond duurzame armoedebestrijding of -verlichting als 
| 28 | het uiteindelijke doel van de EU-steun. Die steun zou conform de kernprincipes van het 
Verdrag van Maastricht op de minst-ontwikkelde landen (MOL) gericht moeten zijn. 
Tegelijkertijd hebben achtereenvolgende Nederlandse regeringen gepleit voor een rol van 
de EU in de minder arme landen aan de grenzen van de Unie en voor steun aan armen in 
landen met een laag of gemiddeld inkomen in Azië en Latijns-Amerika. Ook moest 
bijzondere aandacht worden geschonken aan de relatie tussen veiligheid en ontwikkeling, 
met name in Afrika. Verder benadrukte Nederland dat de EU een bijzonder mandaat heeft 
waar het gaat om beleidscoherentie voor ontwikkeling, vooral wat betreft de samenhang 
tussen ontwikkelingshulp en het beleid van de Unie inzake landbouw en visserij, handel, 
milieu (2001-2009) en migratie, werkgelegenheid, energie en vrede en veiligheid (2004-
2009). Sinds de beleidsnota ‘Kwaliteit van de Europese Hulp’ uit 1999 heeft Nederland 
aangedrongen op verbetering van de kwaliteit van de EU-ontwikkelingshulp. Kwaliteit was 
in dit verband een brede term die ook betrekking had op zaken als versplintering en 
centralisering van het hulpbeheer, traagheid van het hulpverleningssysteem en het 
ontbreken van informatie over resultaten. In recentere jaren stond de Nederlandse agenda 
in het teken van verlening van algemene begrotingssteun door de Commissie. Aanvankelijk 
vielen de standpunten samen, maar vanaf 2008 heeft Nederland een kritischer houding ten 
aanzien van algemene begrotingssteun ingenomen.
Uit de evaluatie blijkt dat zowel het algemene EU-ontwikkelingshulpbeleid vanaf 2000 als 
de Overeenkomst van Cotonou prioriteiten bevatten die ook het Nederlands beleid inzake 
bilaterale hulp kenmerken: eigen verantwoordelijkheid, focus op armoede en werken aan 
de millenniumdoelstellingen, integratie van politieke aspecten en Europese en Nederlandse 
waarden (zie hierboven) en aandacht voor beleidscoherentie voor ontwikkeling. Net als 
andere lidstaten, was Nederland nauw betrokken bij de formulering van het 

Samenvatting en conclusies 
verschillen de meningen over de vraag of met die diensten specifiek in de behoeften van de 
armen werd voorzien. Met 15% van de EOF-uitgaven was ook de sector economische 
infrastructuur en diensten, waaronder energie- en weginfrastructuur, een belangrijk 
aandachtspunt van de EU. De evaluaties van de Commissie zijn veelal minder positief waar 
het gaat om de vraag in hoeverre er specifiek op de armen gefocust is en of zij ook echt van 
de nieuwe of betere wegen profijt hebben gehad. De steun voor productiesectoren (van 
2 
landbouw tot industrie) bleef in de periode 2000-2011 beperkt tot ongeveer 13%
. Voor delen van de intra-ACS-toewijzing geldt een doelbewuste focus op armoede; zo 
worden er middelen gereserveerd voor bijvoorbeeld het Global Fund to Fight Aids, 
Tuberculosis and Malaria en het Fast Track Initiative voor onderwijs. Dat geldt in veel 
mindere mate voor de regionale programma’s, waarbij de nadruk ligt op steun voor 
regionale economische integratie. 
Het belang van eigen verantwoordelijkheid bij EU-ontwikkelingshulp
Uit de evaluatie blijkt dat de nationale strategiedocumenten in overleg met partnerlanden 
worden opgesteld en doorgaans nauw met de strategieën voor armoedebestrijding van die 
landen verbonden zijn. Overleg vindt vooral plaats met nationale overheidsinstellingen, 
waarbij een centrale rol is weggelegd voor de ministeries van Planning en Financiën, waar 
de nationale ordonnateur zetelt. Andere nationale spelers, waaronder parlement, 
| 30 | maatschappelijk middenveld en private sector, zijn minder nauw betrokken, ondanks de 
inspanningen van de EU om hun deelname te bevorderen. De situatie verschilt van land tot 
land, afhankelijk van, onder meer, het centrale overheidsbeleid, de krachtsverhoudingen 
tussen deze instellingen en de centrale overheid en hun institutionele capaciteit, die, alle 
inspanningen ter versterking ten spijt, vaak nog steeds beperkt is. Tegelijkertijd is in reactie 
op de wensen van het Europees Parlement en/of de lidstaten een reeks faciliteiten en 
trustfondsen op het gebied van water, energie en infrastructuur onder het EOF opgezet die 
buiten de nationale programmeringsprocessen zijn gebleven en via oproepen tot het 
indienen van voorstellen ten uitvoer worden gelegd. 
Standpunt van Nederland en van de Commissie over begrotingssteun 
Tot de Agenda for Change van 2011 gold op EU-niveau dat waar begrotingssteun mogelijk 
was, deze vorm van hulpverlening - om uiteenlopende redenen - de voorkeur had. Dat blijkt 
bijvoorbeeld uit de Europese consensus voor ontwikkeling uit 2005, een reeks conclusies 
van de Raad en de richtsnoeren van de Raad voor de Actie-agenda van Accra uit 2008. Tot 
2008 was dit in lijn met het Nederlandse standpunt dat de Commissie moest afstappen van 
de traditionele projecten en programma’s mits aan de subsidiabiliteitscriteria voor 
begrotingssteun van de Overeenkomst van Cotonou was voldaan. Bijgevolg is een 
aanzienlijk deel van het EOF aangewend voor hetzij algemene hetzij sectorale 
begrotingssteun. Tussen 2002 en 2010 zijn de uitgaven uit het EOF voor algemene 
begrotingssteun gestegen van 465 miljoen euro tot 970 miljoen euro - ruim een 
verdubbeling dus -, oftewel, voor de gehele periode, in totaal ongeveer 5,2 miljard euro. De 
2 
Deze cijfers zijn exclusief de uitgaven krachtens de investeringsfaciliteit. Ruim 30% van de tussen 2004 
en 2009 in dat kader verstrekte leningen werd aangewend voor industriële ontwikkeling.

Samenvatting en conclusies 
Over het geheel genomen geven de evaluaties aan dat de duurzaamheid van de resultaten van 
steunmaatregelen een bron van zorg blijft, ondanks meer ownership en afstemming op 
nationale prioriteiten. Eigen middelen worden in de MOL nog altijd slechts in beperkte 
mate gegenereerd en sommige van deze landen blijven in hoge mate afhankelijk van 
donorfinanciering. 
In de evaluaties van de Commissie wordt geconstateerd dat sectoroverschrijdende kwesties (zoals 
gender en milieu) afgezien van een enkel specifiek project of programma in veel gevallen 
toch vooral een papieren prioriteit blijven. 
Het belang van beleidscoherentie voor ontwikkeling (BCO) 
Nederland heeft het voortouw genomen bij de opzet van een informeel netwerk inzake 
beleidscoherentie voor ontwikkeling (BCO) onder diverse EU-lidstaten. Dit een netwerk 
bestaat nog steeds, zij het dat niet alle leden actief zijn. Het Verdrag van Maastricht bevatte 
al een eerste aanzet tot BCO, maar het concept werd weer zeer actueel met het document 
‘Coherentie van het ontwikkelingsbeleid – vaststelling van een beleidskader dat de hele 
Unie omvat’ uit 2009. Sinds 2007 heeft de Commissie drie verslagen over BCO uitgebracht 
waarin wordt ingegaan op de bewustmakings-, beleids- en institutionele regelingen in de 
lidstaten. De feitelijke impact van maatregelen op dit vlak in de ontwikkelingslanden zelf is 
| 32 | echter nauwelijks onderzocht. Het vraagstuk komt wel aan de orde in de nationale 
strategiedocumenten, maar krijgt niet veel aandacht in de evaluaties van de Commissie en 
als het al behandeld wordt, is dat meestal vanuit het perspectief van (het gebrek aan) 
samenhang tussen hulp- en handelsbeleid. 
Het belang van het thema veiligheid en ontwikkeling is op Europees niveau erkend, onder 
meer in het Europese veiligheids- en defensiebeleid uit 2003. De Overeenkomst van 
Cotonou bevatte bepalingen dienaangaande die bij de herzieningen van 2005 en 2010 zijn 
aangescherpt. Op operationeel niveau is een en ander vertaald in de oprichting van de 
Afrikaanse Vredesfaciliteit (2003), een initiatief dat door Nederland werd verwelkomd. Dit 
wordt als een van de meer geslaagde initiatieven in het kader van de intra-ACS-component 
van het EOF beschouwd, al blijft de financiering op lange termijn een probleem. 
De meerwaarde of complementariteit van EU-ontwikkelingshulp 
Het Verdrag van Lissabon bracht geen verandering in de eerdere afspraken uit het Verdrag 
van Maastricht uit 1992: ontwikkelingssamenwerking is nog altijd een gedeelde 
verantwoordelijkheid van de Unie en de lidstaten. Onduidelijkheid over wat onder 
‘meerwaarde’ of ‘complementariteit’ moet worden verstaan kenmerkt nog steeds de 
discussies over de taakverdeling en de focus van communautaire en bilaterale 
steunprogramma’s. Ook de beleidsdocumenten die sinds 2000 overeengekomen zijn, zoals 
de Europese consensus uit 2005, hebben weinig duidelijkheid gebracht. Ze hebben een 
lange lijst opgeleverd van gebieden waarop de communautaire hulp relatieve voordelen zou 
moeten hebben - variërend van handel tot werkgelegenheid - maar maken niet duidelijk 
wie wat zou moeten doen. De vraag wat de Commissie geacht wordt te doen, voor zover ze 
niet gewoon als een van de Europese donoren moet worden aangemerkt, is nooit duidelijk 
beantwoord.

Samenvatting en conclusies 
wordt dat de resultaten ofwel teleurstellend waren ofwel niet konden worden aangetoond. 
e
Niettemin is de regionale component onder het 10 EOF uitgebreid. Serieuze problemen zijn 
vastgesteld met betrekking tot: a) de selectie van regionale partners, vanwege overlappende 
institutionele kaders, met name in Afrika, en vanwege capaciteitsbeperkingen, ook voor 
toezicht en evaluatie; b) de nog steeds geringe urgentie van regionale integratie voor de 
leden van de groep van ACS-landen, die voorrang geven aan het opbouwen van hun eigen 
nationale instituties; en c) inadequaat beheer van de programma’s en versnippering van de 
beheerverantwoordelijkheden op EU-delegatieniveau. De complexe opzet van de regionale 
constellaties was een van de factoren die ertoe hebben bijdragen dat onderhandelingen 
over economische partnerschapsovereenkomsten zich voortsleepten en zelden resultaat 
opleverden. 
Vooralsnog kunnen de economische partnerschapsovereenkomsten (EPO’s), in het verleden 
de kern van veel regionale programma’s, geen succes worden genoemd. Alleen in de 
Cariben is sprake van een allesomvattende regionale EPO; elders bestaan er alleen bilaterale 
interim-overeenkomsten met (combinaties van) afzonderlijke landen. Belangrijke 
probleempunten die in de onderhandelingen naar voren zijn gekomen zijn: a) het 
ontbreken van een uniforme interpretatie en benadering van de nieuwe 
handelsovereenkomst en twijfels onder de ACS-landen omtrent het voordeel dat de EPO’s 
| 34 | opleveren; b) de te geringe capaciteit aan ACS-zijde om doeltreffend te kunnen 
onderhandelen; c) de complexiteit van het institutionele kader aan ACS-zijde; d) zorgen 
over controversiële bepalingen in de overeenkomst; en e) ontoereikende flankerende 
maatregelen in verband met belemmeringen aan de aanbodzijde. Voor de MOL onder de 
ACS-landen bood de ‘Everything But Arms’-regeling tot op zekere hoogte een uitweg uit de 
impasse. 
Tot slot, wat de handelsvolumes tussen de ACS-landen en de EU in de afgelopen tien jaar 
betreft, blijkt uit de beschikbare gegevens over de wereldhandel in de periode 2000-2011 
dat: a) deze volumes in waarde zijn toegenomen, afgezien van een tijdelijke daling in 2009; 
b) de EU voor de ACS-landen een belangrijke handelspartner is gebleven maar haar aandeel 
in de ACS-uitvoer heeft zien dalen; c) de invoer uit de ACS-landen slechts een klein deel van 
de totale EU-invoer uitmaakte; d) van diversificatie van de ACS-uitvoer nauwelijks sprake 
was - het leeuwendeel bestaat nog steeds uit grondstoffen en minerale brandstoffen (olie en 
gas) en veel landen zijn nog altijd afhankelijk van enkele basisproducten; en e) het 
overgrote deel van de ACS-uitvoer naar de EU voor rekening komt van een zeer klein aantal 
landen, waaronder Zuid-Afrika. 
Hervormingen in het beheer van de hulp
Bij aanvang van het nieuwe millennium werd een agenda voor hervorming van het beheer 
van de EU-steun ingevoerd, met onder meer de oprichting van EuropeAid, versterking van 
de functies voor (financieel) beheer, interne controle en toezicht en, parallel daaraan, 
deconcentratie van beheertaken ten gunste van de EU-delegaties. Hoewel 
beleidsaangelegenheden aangaande de ACS-landen onder andere directoraten-generaal zijn 
gebleven, betekende de oprichting van EuropeAid dat de gehele hulpverleningscyclus (van 
programmering tot evaluatie) in één organisatie werd geïntegreerd. Ook werd een functie 

Samenvatting en conclusies 
Financiële planning en rapportage
Uit de jaarlijkse audits van de operationele EOF’s die de Europese Rekenkamer heeft verricht 
blijkt dat het oordeel van de Rekenkamer over de prestaties van de Commissie op het gebied 
van de waarborging van financieel toezicht en beheer, risicobeheer en financiële planning 
en rapportage in de loop der jaren gestaag verbeterd is. In 2011 luidde het oordeel dat de 
jaarverslagen van EuropeAid een getrouw beeld gaven van de implementatie en resultaten 
van de opgezette toezicht- en controlesystemen. Ook op landenniveau is de controle 
verbeterd. Procedures werden beter nageleefd en er werd herhaaldelijk actie ondernomen 
om ze te stroomlijnen, te harmoniseren en te vereenvoudigen. De complexiteit, het gebrek 
aan flexibiliteit en de lange duur van de procedures zelf blijven evenwel de nodige discussie 
opleveren. Commissie, lidstaten en Parlement zijn gezamenlijk verantwoordelijk voor deze 
situatie.
De Europese Rekenkamer stelde vast dat er in het financieel beheer en de financiële 
controle overeenkomstig haar aanbevelingen verbeteringen waren doorgevoerd. Toch bleef 
ze aandringen op verdere verbetering, daar er nog steeds sprake was van - hoofdzakelijk 
procedurele - onregelmatigheden bij vastleggingen en betalingen op landenniveau, zij het 
met wisselende of verwaarloosbare financiële gevolgen. De oprichting van contract- en 
financiële afdelingen bij de delegaties is wat dit betreft nuttig geweest, al blijft de 
| 36 | Rekenkamer het percentage van fouten van materieel belang voor betalingen schatten op 2 
tot 5%. Een andere belangrijke kwestie in de jaren rond de eeuwwisseling was dat de 
beschikbare middelen ofwel niet vastgelegd ofwel vastgelegd maar niet volledig besteed 
werden. Dit resulteerde in grote reserves voor hulp die ongebruikt bleven en in aanzienlijke 
bedragen aan ‘oude’ en ‘sluimerende’ RAL (reste à liquider). Volgens de Europese Rekenkamer 
hebben de verbeteringen in het financieel beheer en de financiële planning ertoe 
bijgedragen dat de onderuitputting van beschikbare middelen sinds 2004 is gedaald. Verder 
stelde de Rekenkamer in 2011 vast dat zich bij minder steunmaatregelen substantiële 
vertragingen voordeden. Daar waar de streefcijfers voor financiële planning de afgelopen 
jaren niet werden gehaald, was dat hoofdzakelijk het gevolg van: a) niet-uitbetaling van 
tranches voor begrotingssteun omdat het partnerland zijn verplichtingen niet was 
nagekomen, b) vertragingen bij infrastructurele werken, c) vertragingen bij de 
programmering of goedkeuring van financieringsbesluiten of d) opschorting van steun als 
gevolg van het nemen van passende maatregelen na overleg krachtens artikel 96.
Vermoedens van fraude in verband met de externe betrekkingen van de EU worden 
onderzocht door het Europees Bureau voor fraudebestrijding (OLAF). In de periode 
1999-2010 heeft OLAF ongeveer 690 van dergelijke zaken geopend; een derde daarvan werd 
in 2009 en 2010 als niet-ontvankelijk afgesloten. OLAF richt zich op fraude die niet door de 
lidstaten wordt onderzocht, maar het percentage aan externe hulpverlening gerelateerde 
fraudegevallen ten opzichte van het totale aantal onderzochte gevallen lag onder het 
percentage dat in de algehele begroting van de Commissie is gereserveerd voor externe 
betrekkingen. De Commissie onderneemt actie om onrechtmatig verkregen middelen terug 
te vorderen en is daarin relatief succesvol.

Samenvatting en conclusies 
voorbeelden tegenover als Liberia, Rwanda en tot op zekere hoogte ook Oeganda. Verder 
lijdt het geen twijfel dat de dialoog meer vruchten afwerpt als hij door EU-delegaties en 
lidstaten gezamenlijk wordt gevoerd. De concrete impact van de politieke dialoog van artikel 
8 en de resultaten ervan zijn echter nauwelijks systematisch onderzocht. De bevindingen in 
de landenevaluaties waarin over deze dialoog wordt gerapporteerd lopen uiteen. In een 
enkel geval heeft de politieke dialoog tot positieve resultaten geleid (zoals de invoering van 
een nieuwe wet inzake hervormingen op mediagebied in Rwanda).
Overleg krachtens artikel 96
De Unie heeft selectief gebruikgemaakt van het overleginstrument van artikel 96 wanneer 
de dialoog van artikel 8 geen enkel resultaat opleverde. In de periode 2000-2010 betrof het 
twaalf ACS-landen. Het overleg werd meestal geopend naar aanleiding van staatsgrepen, 
maar ook bij plotselinge ernstige verslechtering van de politieke en mensenrechtensituatie, 
manipulaties bij verkiezingen en schendingen van andere fundamentele vrijheden. Een 
uitzondering was Togo. Het overleg werd geopend ongeacht de economische of strategische 
belangen in het land in kwestie. In geen van de gevallen waren mensenrechtenschendingen 
de enige grond voor het openen van het overleg. Als de politieke situatie precair was, zoals 
tijdens een burgeroorlog, of als er een vredesakkoord ophanden was, besloot de EU 
doorgaans tot de weg van stille diplomatie. Het overleg van artikel 96 werd zeker niet in alle 
| 38 | gevallen van ernstige inbreuken op de essentiële en fundamentele elementen van de 
Overeenkomst van Cotonou geïnitieerd. 
De Unie heeft zowel positieve als negatieve passende maatregelen, waaronder opschorting 
van de hulp, maar ook sancties conform het gemeenschappelijk buitenlands en 
veiligheidsbeleid toegepast. Afgemeten aan de vraag of er voldoende verbetering zichtbaar 
werd in de situatie die aanleiding was voor het openen van de dialoog, zodat de EU de hulp 
kon hervatten, kenden de genomen maatregelen wisselend succes. Positieve voorbeelden 
waren onder meer Guinee-Bissau en Mauritanië; minder succes hadden de maatregelen in 
Guinee en Zimbabwe. Belangrijke succesfactoren waren onder meer het selectief gebruik 
van het instrument en de termijnen voor het openen van het artikel 96-overleg (het overleg 
wordt alleen geïnitieerd wanneer de EU een redelijke kans meent te hebben om invloed op 
de autoriteiten van het land in kwestie uit te kunnen oefenen, en die kans neemt toe 
naarmate de afhankelijkheid van EU-steun groter is) en de politieke wil van de lokale 
autoriteiten. Ook samenhang tussen de acties van de EU als geheel en die van de 
afzonderlijke lidstaten, betrokkenheid van ‘bevriende landen’ of ACS-peers, buurlanden en 
regionale organisaties en het gebruik van passende maatregelen die berusten op een 
combinatie van ‘carrots and sticks’  hebben een positief effect.
Belangrijkste conclusies 
•	 Het ontwikkelingshulpbeleid van de EU en de kernbeginselen van de Nederlandse ontwikkelingshulp 
vallen steeds meer samen
De afgelopen twaalf jaar zijn er in de door de Raad overeengekomen algemene beginselen 
van de EU-ontwikkelingshulp de nodige verbeteringen zichtbaar geworden. Dat geldt ook 
voor hetgeen in het kader van de Overeenkomst van Cotonou nagestreefd wordt. De 

Samenvatting en conclusies 
onderzoek waaruit blijkt dat algemene begrotingssteun niet of nauwelijks geholpen heeft 
om het bestuur te verbeteren, corruptie of mensenrechtenschendingen aan te pakken of 
eerlijke verkiezingen te waarborgen. Daarvan was alleen sprake wanneer er in de 
partnerlanden reeds animo voor verandering bestond. 
Nederland heeft invloed kunnen uitoefenen op de recente communautaire besluitvorming 
omtrent het instrument. Het idee was dat door minder EU begrotingssteun op het budget 
voor EU-ontwikkelingshulp bezuinigd zou kunnen worden. Of het nieuwe EU beleid voor 
begrotingssteun volstaat om het hoofd te bieden aan de uitdagingen op 
ontwikkelingsgebied waarvoor het bedoeld is zal moeten worden afgewacht.
•	 Het EOF is nadrukkelijk op armoede gericht, maar over de feitelijke resultaten is nog steeds weinig bekend 
De politieke nadruk op armoede en de centrale armoededimensie van de EOF-
landenprogramma’s zijn tot op zekere hoogte ook vertaald in concrete maatregelen die 
direct op armoedebestrijding gericht waren. Redelijk succesvol in dit verband waren de 
interventies op het gebied van gezondheid en onderwijs, die ook via EU-financiering voor 
mondiale initiatieven en algemene begrotingssteun werden gesteund. Op andere 
belangrijke terreinen, met een minder directe armoedefocus (zoals wegen en steun voor de 
Afrikaanse vredesfaciliteit), zijn de resultaten wisselender of niet duidelijk omdat de impact 
niet grondig geëvalueerd is. Over het geheel genomen zijn de belangrijkste 
| 40 | probleempunten de minimale institutionele capaciteit en de beperkte middelen ter 
waarborging van de duurzaamheid. De huidige aandacht voor belasting- en 
ontwikkelingsvraagstukken met het doel meer binnenlandse middelen te genereren is dan 
ook alleszins gerechtvaardigd.
•	 Het beheer van de EU-steun is aanzienlijk verbeterd, maar de moeizame procedures en de kwaliteit en 
reikwijdte van de toezicht- en evaluatiesystemen blijven een bron van zorg
De afgelopen jaren zijn er belangrijke verbeteringen doorgevoerd in het beheer van de 
hulpstromen van de EU, al hebben die wel hogere beheerkosten en complexe, nog steeds 
trage procedures met zich meegebracht. Deel van het probleem is het uitblijven van 
hervormingen in de werkgroep- en comitologiestructuur in Brussel. 
Uit audits en speciale verslagen van de Europese Rekenkamer blijkt dat de Commissie een 
grote stap vooruit heeft gezet wat betreft controle, planning en toezicht op financieel 
gebied, al laat de situatie bij de delegaties nog te wensen over. Evenzeer is er het nodige 
verbeterd op het punt van transparantie, vooral in Brussel, maar ook, zij het in mindere 
mate, op landenniveau. Niettemin zijn er nog steeds problemen bij het toezicht op en de 
evaluatie van de hulp en bij de rapportage over resultaten en effecten. Hoewel de lidstaten, 
waaronder Nederland, herhaaldelijk aangedrongen hebben op verbeteringen op dat vlak, 
kreeg de Commissie in de context van een door de lidstaten opgelegde nulgroei noch de 
financiële noch de personele middelen die zij nodig had om haar prestaties te kunnen 
verbeteren. 
In meer algemene zin is er sprake van een duidelijk spanningsveld tussen de omvang van de 
EOF-begroting, het streven deze aan te vullen via innovatieve financieringsregelingen, 
suggesties om het gebruik van begrotingssteun te beperken, het uitblijven van de nodige 

1
Introduction

Introduction
Originally the evaluation was to cover the years 2000 to 2010, a period long enough to 
capture developments in EU aid policies and to assess their results and (net) outcomes on 
the basis of existing evaluation evidence. Starting point for the evaluation was the year 2000 
as it marked, apart from the signing of the Cotonou Agreement, the start of major aid 
management reforms process in the Commission and the year of the first joint Council-
Commission Statement on EU Development Policy. It soon transpired however, that 
developments during the decade could not well be understood without referring to e.g. the 
joint Member State - EU evaluation of EU aid of the mid-1990s and Dutch policy documents 
of 1999. The evaluation period was extended to include 2011 and major part of 2012 to 
capture the reforms that were introduced following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty 
in 2010-2011 and important developments in EU aid policies such as the Agenda for Change 
(COM (2011) 637) and The future approach to EU budget support to third countries (COM 
(2011 (638)). 
Starting point for the evaluation have been the following Dutch priorities with respect to EU 
aid in general and EDF in particular: 
•	 Focus on least developed countries, particularly in Africa, sustainable poverty alleviation 
and the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), addressing also issues of peace and 
| 44 | conflict. 
•	 The ‘quality’ of EU aid,  with the Ministry’s broad ‘quality’ concept combining aspects of 
aid management, including monitoring and evaluation, and the aid effectiveness agenda.
•	 The importance attached to integrating foreign policy and development aid, with the 
Cotonou Agreement serving as a framework to address issues of human rights, 
democracy, rule of law and good governance. 
•	 P olicy coherence for development – focusing on the coherence between development aid 
and the Union’s policies on agriculture and fisheries, trade, environment as well as 
migration, employment, energy and peace and security. 
•	 Cooperation and coordination at a European level and with other bilateral donors, as 
well as with international financial institutions and the United Nations reflecting the 
Dutch emphasis on effective multilateralism.
•	 Dutch views on the aid modalities and approaches that the Commission ought to use, 
especially general budget support. 
Though consistent in many respects the Dutch position on these priorities has evolved over 
the years. Likewise, there have been changes in EU aid policies which reflect the outcome of 
interaction between Commission, the Council, representing the Member States, the 
European Parliament, and, more recently, the European External Action Service. The 
analysis is therefore to a certain extent historical, reflecting changing opinions of these 
actors over time. 

Introduction
7
comparison would require a different type of study. It also does not deal with how 
negotiations are conducted in the Hague – in order to come to a common ‘Dutch position’ 
– or in Brussels to get this position across to other EU Member States and the Commission 
and ultimately reflected in policy and decision-making. It will, nevertheless, address the 
question whether the Netherlands can indeed sufficiently be pleased with the final result in 
terms of policies, positions and guidelines and, ultimately, the results obtained. 
Methodology
The evaluation has applied the following research tools: (i) document study; (ii) interviews 
and (iii) country visits. No primary research was undertaken.
Documentation
For the analysis of the Dutch position, we used public documents coming from several 
8
ministries as well as records of meetings held in the Dutch parliament. Sources ranged 
from annual Ministry budgets and policy notes to correspondence and annotated agendas 
for and reports on Council meetings. 
For a reconstruction of EU aid policies, we used documents of the Commission, the Council 
as well as the European Parliament. We also used documentation of the European 
| 46 | Investment Bank and audit reports and special reports of the European Court of Auditors, 
together with academic and grey literature and reports of the Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD). Data on EDF commitments and expenditures were 
primarily obtained from annual and financial reports. Reconciling these data over a period 
of more than 10 years proved difficult and not always possible.
To get information on EDF implementation, the evaluation relied on publicly available 
evaluations prepared for the Joint Evaluation Unit of the Commission’s aid management 
services – there is very little academic research on this topic. The evaluation relied in this 
respect on the JEU’s quality assessment of these evaluation reports; no separate assessment 
was made.  Other sources of information were the special reports of the European Court of 
Auditors. Annex 12 provides an overview of all documents used.
7 
Over the years, a series of attempts has been made to make such a comparison. See in this respect e.g. 
Easterly, W., Levine, R. and Roodman, D. (2003), New Data, New Doubts: Revisiting ‘Aid, Policies and 
Growth, Center for Global Development Working Paper 26. Washington, DC; Easterly, W., and T. Pfutze 
(2008). Where does the Money Go? Best and Worst Practices in Foreign Aid. Working Paper 21. 
Brookings Global Economy and Development, Washington, DC; Roodman, D (2009). An Index of Donor 
Performance.’ Center for Global Development Working Paper 67. Washington, DC; Birdsall, N. and 
Kharas, H. with Mahgoub, A. and Perakis, R. (2010). Quality of Official Development Assistance 
Assessment. Center for Global Development. Washington DC; Geddes, M. (2012). Where do European 
Institutions rank on donor quality? ODI Background Note. June. The studies use different criteria and 
come to different rankings of multilateral and bilateral aid performance. The studies were not helpful in 
looking at EDF as they examined the total EU aid package, including e.g. aid to the EU’s neighbouring 
countries.
8 
Parliamentary documents are referred to according to their number in the Parliamentary records and 
the year of publication (i.e. KST xxxxx (year)).

Introduction
Report structure
The structure of the report is as follows.
Part 1 on Policy Matters, provides in chapter 1 a general introduction to EU aid and the EDF 
and the Cotonou Agreement. It also contains information on the EU ODA budget and its use 
and the finances made available for the EDF and how these have been allocated. The chapter 
concludes with an overview of the institutional set-up for EU aid policy making and delivery 
in Brussels. Chapter 2 deals with the Dutch position on EU aid in general and the EDF in 
particular. It deals with the Dutch perspective on the role of the Union in development aid, 
its relation with Dutch bilateral aid and the main priorities of the Netherlands on what EU 
aid should look like. The chapter concludes with an overview of how the Netherlands has 
organised itself to influence EU policy-making in Brussels. Chapter 3 gives an overview of 
the main aid policies agreed upon at a European level since 2000, including those on 
budget support, and how the Netherlands has assessed these policies. 
Part 2 on Management Matters, is entirely devoted to the issue of EU aid management, both in 
Brussels and abroad.  Chapter 5 focuses on the changes that have taken place in Brussels and 
pays attention to changes in institutional set-up following the Lisbon Treaty, the way in 
| 48 | which quality control, and monitoring and evaluation are handled and what has been done 
in terms of transparency. Chapter 6 is about aid management at the level of the EU 
delegations and the changes therein since 2002. It pays particular attention to the issues of 
staffing and aid procedures. Chapter 7 focuses on the main developments in the area of 
financial control and supervision, external auditing and in terms of dealing with issues of 
possible fraud.
Part 3 on EDF implementation and results provides information on the implementation and 
results accomplished under the EDF at national, regional and inter-regional levels. Chapter 
7 on national programmes, focuses on the application of the principles of the Cotonou 
Agreement on EU aid planning at country level, the issue of EDF sector focus and the added 
value or complementarity of EU aid. It also provides information on the results and (net) 
outcomes accomplished. The chapter concludes with a presentation on the way in which 
the political pillar of the Cotonou Agreement has been handled. Chapter 8 provides a brief 
on regional programmes and what is known of their results and information on the state of 
affairs of the Economic Partnership Agreements and ACP-EU trade relations.  The intra-ACP 
component of the EDF is dealt with in chapter 9; it is primarily descriptive and contains a 
presentation of the African Peace Facility, the facilities for water and energy and the 
EU-Africa Infrastructure Trust Fund.  
The annexes are partly in print and included in the report and partly on the CD-ROM that 
comes with this publication. The print version includes a brief on IOB (Annex 1), shortened 
terms of reference (Annex 2), a list of respondents (Annex 3) as well as more detailed 
statistics on the EDF (Annex 4). The CD-ROM contains in addition the following annexes: 
Views from country evaluations (Annex 5); EU treaties on aid (Annex 6); Other EDF 
instruments (Annex 7); Other European foreign aid instruments (Annex 8); The Article 8 

Part 1
Policy matters

1 
Basic characteristics of EU aid and 
the European Development Fund

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
competence of both Member States and Commission and Community aid was to 
‘be complementary to the policies pursued by the Member States’. Community and 
Member States were to coordinate their aid policies and consult each other on their 
aid programmes. 
The Treaty of Amsterdam (October 1997) stressed the importance of consistency 
of the Community’s external relations, security, economic and development 
policies. The Treaty aimed to make its Common Foreign and Security Policy more 
effective and to equip the Community better for its role in international politics by 
introducing the position of High Representative for this policy field. 
The Treaty of Nice (February 2001) reconfirmed the Community’s position on 
solidarity of the Rome Treaty and the focus of aid and the tasks of the Community 
as mentioned in the Maastricht Treaty in the areas of development cooperation. It 
also reconfirmed the complementarity principle and the general objectives of 
democracy, the rule of law and respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms. 
| 54 | Article 188 of the Treaty of Lisbon (December 2007), which is the legal basis for the 
current European Union, integrated development cooperation into overall EU 
foreign policy but at the same time made development policy a ‘policy of its own 
right’. The Treaty reconfirmed earlier statements on complementarity and made 
poverty eradication the overall aim of EU development cooperation. It also 
reconfirmed the earlier principles of coordination and consultation, also ‘in 
international organisations and during international conferences’ (Article 188). On 
coherence, the Treaty mentions that ‘(the) Union shall take account of the objecti-
ves of development cooperation in the policies that it implements which are likely 
to affect developing countries’. The Treaty also had important organisational 
implications. New was furthermore the statement on the common values on which 
the Union is founded (though these have been fairly constant in guiding the 
Union’s foreign policy initiatives (Olsen (2008)), i.e. respect for human dignity, 
freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights.
To be able to play this role, EU aid was provided under a broad and seemingly ever 
expanding spectrum of aid policies (see e.g. Grilli (1993), Reisen (1999), Arts and Dickson 
(2004) and Frisch (2008)). The original geographical emphasis in development co-operation 
changed over time, reflecting the ‘different perspectives brought by each new entrant to the 
 
EU’ and ‘the changing role of development policy’ (OECD (2002)).
From the original aid 
relationship with European colonies as reflected in the Rome Treaty of 1957, by the start of 
the new Millennium the EU had ‘established a broad framework of external relations 
concerned with new opportunities for further enlargement of the EU within Europe, the 
need for peace and stability in neighbouring areas of the Middle East and the Balkans, and 
enhancing global trade’ (OECD (2002)). To deal with an increasingly diverse landscape, the 

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
1.2  The European Development Fund
General
The EDF is the oldest European aid instrument and goes back to the ‘Fonds européen de 
développement et les pays d’outre-mer associés’. This Fund was in place from 1959 to 1964 and 
served to finance mainly capital infrastructure such as roads, hospitals and schools in 
European colonies and territories in Africa plus New Guinea and French OCTs in the Pacific. 
With the end of European colonial rule and an increasing number of overseas countries and 
territories gaining independence by the early 1960s, it was realised that the original set-up 
– only an internal agreement among the EU Member States – had become obsolete. From 
1963 onwards, this agreement was complemented by a series of international agreements, 
starting with the Yaoundé I Convention and ending with the Cotonou Partnership 
Agreement of 2000 that after two revisions is still in force today. These Agreements (see Text 
Box 1.2 for the period 1964-2000) have guided to a large extent EU aid relations with the 
group of ACP countries – though its generic aid policies are relevant as well. 
Text Box 1.2 The Yaoundé and Lomé conventions (1964-2000)
The Yaoundé I Convention, was signed with 18 former colonies of the EU Member 
States, united in the Associated African States and Madagascar. It entered into 
| 56 |
force in July 1964 and was followed in 1969 by the Yaoundé II Convention. The 
nd 
Yaoundé conventions provided the framework for the 2 EDF (equivalent budget of 
rd
730 million European Currency Units (ECU)) and the 3 EDF (918 million ECU). With 
the UK joining the Community in 1973, the position of the members of the British 
Commonwealth became an issue. The UK was also keen to put its special trading 
preferences for bananas and sugar under the EU umbrella and to see EU aid also go 
to some of its former colonies. 
The Lomé I Convention was signed with 46 ACP countries in 1975 following the 
establishment of the ACP group in Georgetown in 1975. This coincided with the 
th
approval of 4 EDF (3 billion ECU) and the start of an aid programme for non-asso-
ciated developing countries in Asia, Latin America and Africa. The Agreement 
aimed at implementing a model of development founded on partnership and 
solidarity. Lomé I made ACP countries responsible for their own development and 
gave them a lead role in managing Lomé resources. Lomé I also introduced the 
so-called STABEX scheme to help stabilise export receipts on agricultural products 
together with non-reciprocal trade preferences for most exports form ACP 
countries to the Community as a means to promote economic development. 
th
Lomé II was signed in October 1979 with 58 ACP countries – in parallel with the 5 
EDF (4.7 billion ECU). It did not introduce major changes apart from establishing 
SYSMIN, a STABEX-like system for the mining industry.  Lomé III followed in 1985 in 
th
conjunction with the 6 EDF (7.4 billion ECU) and was signed with 65 ACP countries. 
It implied a shift away from the promotion of industrial development to self-reliant 
development on the basis of self-sufficiency and food security.  

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
•	 	the Lomé trade regime was increasingly challenged since it had done little to increase and 
diversify the export from ACP countries. Furthermore, it had become incompatible with 
the new international rules agreed through the World Trade Organisation, and 
•	 	the complexity and questionable impact of aid, with the Commission referring to ‘patchy 
achievements of ACP-EU cooperation’. Like other EU aid, Lomé had become a complex 
tool with too many objectives, instruments and procedures.
Formal negotiations on the successor to Lomé IV bis, starting in September 1998, came to a 
conclusion in February 2000 and the Cotonou Partnership Agreement, valid until 2020, was 
signed on 23 June 2000. It was ratified by the Netherlands in December 2002. Ratification in 
all countries that were party to the agreement took time, close to 3 years, delaying the 
th
start-up of the 9 EDF until 1 April 2003. The following paragraphs describe the Cotonou 
Partnership Agreement and the changes it has gone through in 2005 and 2010 in more 
10 
detail together with the Dutch views on the specifics of this agreement.
The Cotonou Partnership Agreement of 2000
The Cotonou Agreement meant a refocusing of development policies on poverty reduction (see 
Text Box 1.3) – in line with what was stated in the Maastricht Treaty. Moreover, when 
allocating funds, this was not only to be based on an assessment of a country’s needs but 
| 58 | also of its performance.  In contrast to Lomé’s uniformity (Holland (2002)), it allowed for 
greater aid selectivity and differentiation in the treatment of ACP countries. This responded 
to the Netherlands concerns as regards the ‘entitlement culture’ that had emerged, which 
ought to make place for contractual relations and country allocations based on 
performance on agreed targets. 
As had been favoured by the Netherlands, the Agreement specifically enhanced the political 
dimension of ACP-EU cooperation with its focus on addressing corruption and identifying 
human rights, democracy, and the rule of law as essential elements and good governance as 
11
fundamental element of the partnership. Despite reservations on the ACP side, the ACP-EU 
political dialogue was institutionalised on the basis of Article 8, which was seen as a 
strategic tool to discuss a broad range of issues – from human rights, stability, security to 
12
peace and ACP-EU cooperation priorities. The Agreement advocated for participatory 
10 
These views can inter alia be found in KST 45662 (2000), KST 47517 (2000), KST 77546 (2004) and KST 
109560 (2007).
11 
In 1999, the Council confirmed that two key issues were decisive for the success of the negotiations, 
‘namely the EU request for inclusion of good governance, alongside democracy, human rights and rule 
of law, in the essential elements of the new agreement and the definition of the new trade regime’. 
Moreover, ‘(the) Council confirmed its willingness to seek an overall compromise dealing with good 
governance and the non-execution clause which would highlight the particular importance it attaches 
to the issue of corruption’ (Council (2000b)).
12 
In order to meet the concerns of the ACP countries, the EU Member States finally agreed upon 
providing detailed modalities for the political dialogue and detailed provisions about when to proceed 
to an Article 96 procedure. Article 96 provides for consultations in case a signatory to the Agreement 
fails to fulfil an obligation in relation to its essential elements (human rights, democratic principles, and 
the rule of law). Article 97 relates to cases of corruption. See further chapter 7 on this issue.

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
the ACP States ‘in good time’ of measures it intends to take ‘which might affect the interests 
of ACP States’. The topic of migration was introduced through the return and readmission 
clause in Article 13, which was welcomed by the Netherlands. Article 11 of the Agreement 
strengthened the link between development issues and conflict prevention, management 
and resolution. As will be shown in chapter 9, this provision, supported by the Netherlands, 
came in handy when the African Peace Facility was set up in 2003.
Against the wishes of the ACP countries, sizeable envelopes to mitigate the adverse effects of 
instability of the export earnings of ACP States (STABEX) and to encourage the development of 
15
their mining resources (SYSMIN), were abolished in 2000 and a new scheme was introduced. 
Finally, in terms of aid modalities, Article 61 of the Agreement stipulated, in line with the 
Dutch position on this issue, that budget support would be linked to the criteria of proper 
public expenditure management, well defined macro-economic or sectoral policies and 
open and transparent public procurement.
st
The 1 Revision of the Cotonou Partnership Agreement of 2005
Based on its Article 95, which created space for revision every 5 years – though not for 
economic and trade cooperation for which there are special provisions – the Agreement was 
| 60 | revised in 2005. Negotiations on this revision, held during the Netherlands Presidency, were 
formally opened in May 2004 and concluded in February 2005.  Signed by the ACP-EU 
Council of Ministers in June 2005, the revised Agreement went into force in July 2008. 
According to the Commission, a factor complicating the negotiations was that EU Member 
States could not make up their mind whether to incorporate EDF into the budget 
(Commission (2005i)). The revision was ratified by the Netherlands in 2007.
In line with the poverty focus of the original Agreement, the 2005 revision included 
reference to the Millennium Development Goals and the promotion of the fight against 
poverty-related diseases and protection of sexual and reproductive health and rights of 
women. Provisions to facilitate non-state actor access to indicative programme resources 
were made as well. Least developed countries were, once more, given priority. The revision 
furthermore introduced more flexibility in the allocation of resources, amongst others 
through the creation of a B-envelope for unforeseen needs at regional level. As a result it 
became possible to use EDF resources for policies to promote peace and to manage and 
settle conflicts, including post-conflict support. Aid effectiveness became part of the 
fundamental principles of the Agreement, and the principles of ownership, alignment, 
harmonisation, result-oriented management and mutual accountability were to guide 
ACP-EU development cooperation. The revision also introduced an anti-terrorism clause 
15 
See Annex 7 for more details on STABEX and SYSMIN. More recent proposals related to the 11th EDF 
announced the establishment of a shock-absorbing scheme to help ACP countries to mitigate the 
short-term effects of exogenous shocks (Commission (2011t)).

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
tighten existing provisions (BOND and ECDPM (2010)). Referring to ILO Convention 182 on 
the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child 
Labour, the Netherlands preferred to include child labour in the Preamble of the Treaty. It 
was however not supported in its position; child labour was nevertheless included as a 
subject of the Article 8 political dialogue. The Netherlands also wanted to include in the 
article on budget support a reference to additional (political) agreements between EU and 
ACP-countries on this aid instrument in order to strengthen the budget support related 
policy dialogue. This position was, however, rejected, though governance was introduced as 
a criterion for resource allocation. Finally, ACP national parliaments are mentioned for the 
first time as actors of cooperation, with Article 17 providing details on the role of the Joint 
Parliamentary Assembly.
1.3  EU aid funding and spending
General
With the exception of the EDF, as will be further explained below, the instruments 
mentioned in Figure 1.1 are financed from the Commission’s budget for external action 
(Category IV). Total expenditure for external action increased from EUR 3.7 billion in 2000 
| 62 | to EUR 7.8 billion in 2009. The share of the external action budget of the total EU budget 
was some 6.9% in the 1990s and 9.3% in the new Millennium.  Figure 1.2 shows the 
distribution of EU ODA, including the resources from the EDF, by region in the period 
2000-2010. Of a total of some EUR 83 billion spent in this period, 41% has gone to Africa, 
19% to Asia, 15% to European countries, 8% to Central and Latin America and less than 1% to 
countries in the Pacific. Other aid flows represented some 16%. 
Figure 1.2 EU ODA disbursements 2000-2010 (in EUR mln)



ODA multilateral aid, total

Bilateral unallocated

Oceania

Asia

America

Africa

Europe


Year
Amount (€ million)
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
EDF funding and spending
Funding
Contrary to other EU aid instruments, the EDF has remained a fund that is based on a 
separate inter-governmental agreement and is financed through voluntary contributions of 
21
the Member States. For decades , the issue of changing this state of affairs by bringing the 
EDF into the general EU Budget (i.e. budgetisation of EDF (see Text Box 1.4)) has been on the 
European agenda and on the agenda of successive Dutch governments, which have always 
22
been in favour. It surfaced at the time of each renewal of the EDF and popped up during 
the negotiations on the Cotonou Agreement.
Figure 1.3 Share of EU ODA commitments by sector 2000-2010 



Unallocated/Unspecied

Humanitarian Aid

Action Relating to Debt
Commodity Aid/ General Programme 
| 64 | 
Assistance

Multisector/Cross-Cuƒing

Production Sectors
 Economic Infrasructure & Services
Social Infrastructure & Services


Year
21 
Already back in 1984, the Netherlands was, in principle, prepared to replace separate EDF funding by an 
increase of its regular contribution to the EU – provided that Commission aid management would improve 
and other Member States would live up to their ODA commitments  (KST 35264 (1999)). According to 
Daerden and Salama (2002), ‘(as) early as 1973, the European Parliament had proposed the incorporation of 
the EDFs into the Community budget but this had been rejected by the Council of Ministers’.
22 
See for example KST 29902 (1998), KST 123199 (2008), KST 21501-04-123 (2011), KST 21501-04-133 
(2011), KST 22112-1313 (2011), KST 21501-04-137 (2011), KST 21501-04-139 (2011) and KST 22112-1121 
(2011). In January 2011, a motion on this issue was adopted in the Dutch Senate (‘Motie Willems’) asking 
the Government, amongst other things, ‘haar bijdrage aan het Europese ontwikkelingsbeleid in te zetten voor 
coördinatie van dit beleid, en tevens te pleiten voor verlaging van de Nederlandse bijdrage aan het EO-fonds en 
overheveling naar andere efficiënte OS-kanalen en voorts tot opname van deze EOF-begroting in de gehele 
EU-begroting’ (Handelingen 2010-2011, nr. 23, item 8). 
Amount (€ million)
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
The size of the EDF and Member States’ contributions to it are subject of negotiations that 
take place in the Council and COREPER, as well as between Commission, EU Presidency and 
individual Member States. They continue until the overall amount and distribution key are 
agreed upon. Total budget and distribution key are then approved by the Council as part of 
the agreement on the EU multiannual financial framework. Finally, the total EDF envelope, 
the amounts reserved for the ACP countries, the OCT, and support expenditure for the 
Commission are reflected in an Internal financing Agreement that is signed by all EU 
25 
Member States. While Member States may contribute more or less to the EDF, in practice 
the distribution key is followed. Chapter 5 on Revenue Operations of the Financial 
Regulation of 27 March 2003 stipulates the procedures to be followed with respect to the 
Member States’ payments. Annex 4 (Table A.4.1) provides an overview of the Member States’ 
26
annual contributions in the period 2000-2010.
The discussions on contributions to the EDF and those on the overall EU budget are often 
linked. This implies that many Member States, including the Netherlands, consider the total 
amount to be paid to the EU budget when making strategic calculations on their overall 
27
negotiation strategy (Frederiksen (2006) and Kilnes et al (2012)). 
th th
The Dutch share of the 9 EDF is 5.2% and 4.9% for the 10 EDF. Since the total budget of the 
th 28
| 66 | 10 EDF increased, its real contribution increased from EUR 720 million to EUR 1.1 billion. 
In 2008, its contribution to the EDF plus its contribution to development aid through the 
29
EU budget represented some 8% of Dutch ODA. In 2011 this was around 11%. 
Given the size of its contribution, a question is whether any of money channelled through 
the EDF has ‘come back’ to the Netherlands – through for example supply, works and 
th
technical assistance contracts. Back in 1984 under the 4 EDF, the share of Netherlands 
enterprises in EDF contracts with EU Member States was some 5.8% (compared to a 7.3% 
share in the EDF budget). Data obtained from the Commission for the period 2004-2008 
indicates that the Dutch share of EDF financed contracts with enterprises from EU Member 
30
States was 4.7% while it provided some 4.9% to the EDF budget.
25 
For the 9th EDF this Internal Agreement goes back to September 2000, for the 10th EDF to September 2006.
26 
This decline in relative contribution has had repercussions for the number of Dutch votes on the EDF 
Committee going down from 12 out of 221 votes (6.2%) under the 9th EDF to 49 out of 1,004 (EU-27) 
votes (4.9%) under the 10th EDF. However: voting rarely takes place.
27 
See e.g. KST 21501-04-142 (2012), confirming that although the EDF refers to an inter-governmental 
agreement, decision-making is tied with the negotiations on the multi-annual financial framework for 
the years 2014-2020. 
28 
In comparison, the Dutch share was 12% in 1959-1964, 9% in 1964-1969, 8.9% in 1969-1975, to 8% in 
1975-1980 and 7.26% in 1980-1985.
29 
Compared to many other Member States (exceptions are Denmark (9%), Luxemburg (9%) and Sweden 
(7%)), this is relatively low: in 2011, the UK channelled 17% of its ODA budget through EU institutions, 
Germany 21% and France and Italy over 50%  
(http://one.org.s3.amazonaws.com/pdfs/data_report_2012_eu_en.pdf).
30 
In comparison, while the French contribution to the EDF equals around 24%, the share of French 
enterprises of EDF contracts with EU Member States was 34% during this period. In the case of 
Germany these shares were 23% and 8% respectively.

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
36
priority instruments. Finally, and this goes back to the Dutch position on ODA funding by 
EU Member States (see Text Box 1.5), the Netherlands disagreed with the Commission’s 
argument that the Union’s external aid volume should grow strongly to realise European 
ambitions. It argued that if all Member States kept to the norm of spending 0.7% of their gross 
national income (GNI) on aid, the Union as a whole would have significantly more to spend. 
Text Box 1.5 The European 0.7% debate
For many years, the Netherlands has emphasised that other Member States ought 
to live up to the political, not binding, agreement of Seville (June 2002) that, with 
the exception of the new ones, all Member States would gradually increase their 
ODA to 0.33% in 2006 while those already complying with the norm would ‘renew 
their efforts to remain at or above the target of 0.7% ODA, so that collectively a 
European Union average of 0.39% is reached by 2006’ (Council (2002b)). Main 
reasons for this position were: (i) increased ODA levels were needed for reaching 
the MDGs; (ii) the need for the Union to comply with international agreements; (iii) 
big differences in ODA levels between members of one and the same Union were 
 
increasingly difficult to sell at the home front. Time and again, the Council has 
reiterated the importance the ODA commitments made at Union level as a 
37
contribution towards alleviating poverty and meeting the MDGs. The 0.7% norm 
| 68 |
was also incorporated into the European Consensus.  By 2010 however, the Council, 
had to acknowledge that the EU would not reach the collective EU intermediate 
target of 0.56% ODA/GNI by 2010’ (Council (2010p)). Two years later, OECD 
concluded that though EU Member States had contributed 62% of the global 
increase in ODA between 2004 and 2010, with a collective ODA/GNI ratio of 0.44% 
in 2010, the EU failed to reach the 2010 target (OECD (2012)). To the Netherlands, 
this slack performance affected the EU’s credibility as a donor. It was joined in its 
critique by others (e.g. Concord (2010), Concord/ Aidwatch (2011), European 
Parliament (2011d)). Notwithstanding this development, in May 2012, Council 
conclusions reaffirmed the commitment to achieve all EU and Member States’ 
development aid targets, including the collective 0.7% ODA target to be reached by 
2015 (Council (2012a)). Amidst declining global ODA levels, the Council noted in 
October 2012 that nevertheless the EU had ‘maintained its position as the biggest 
global ODA donor’ and that ‘the EU has reached the target of spending at least 
0.15% of GNI on Least Developed Countries and that the share of EU collective ODA 
to Africa increased in 2011’ (Council (2012l)).
36 
Priorities were the European Neighbourhood Policy instrument, the Instrument for Stability and the 
European instrument for Democracy and Human Rights, with KST 21501-20-628 (2012) referring to 
‘nabuurschapsbeleid, stabiliteit en mensenrechten en een gedifferentieerde benadering waarbij hulp 
ten goed komt aan de armste mensen in de armste landen’. Moreover, the more the Netherlands would 
spend through the EU, the less would be available for Dutch national priorities. See also KST 
21501-20-55 (2011) and KST 21501-20-628 (2012).
37 
See for example Council (2002a), (2003a), (2003c), (2004e), (2007a), (2007g), (2008d), (2008e), (2008k), 
(2008f), (2009p), and (2010f). 

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
Table 1.1 provides an overview of the budgets for the 9th EDF (2003-2007), the 10th EDF 
(2008-2013) and the budget of EUR 34.3 billion that was originally proposed by the 
Commission in December 2011 for the 11th EDF (2014-2020). In the meantime, the total 
th 39
budget for the 11 EDF was set at an amount close to EUR 27 billion. 
Table 1.1 9th, 10th and proposed 11th EDF by component (in EUR mln)
th th th
9 EDF 10 EDF 11 EDF
National and regional indicative programmes 17,766 27,658
10,000
Intra ACP and inter-regional programmes 2,700 3,960
Investment Facility 2,200 1,500 600
Overseas countries and territories 175 286 343
Administrative expenditure 125 430 1,714
Total 13,800 22,682 34,276
Sources: Internal Agreement (2000), Internal Agreement (2006), and Commission (2011k)
EDF aid modalities and spending
| 70 | Aid modalities
Within the framework of the Commission’s ‘Aid Delivery Methods’, which also concern the 
EDF, three approaches are distinguished: the traditional project approach, the sector 
approach, and the macro or global approach. At the same time three financing modalities are 
used, i.e. budget support, pool or basket funding and EU procurement and grant award 
procedures. Figure 1.4 depicts how approaches and financing modalities can be interrelated.  
Figure 1.4 EU aid delivery methods
Approaches Financing modalities
Project approach EC procurement and grant award procedures
Sector approach Common pool funds
Macro/Global approach Budget support
Budget support was until 2011, the preferred modality of the Commission wherever the 
circumstances were right and eligibility criteria mentioned in the Cotonou Agreement were 
met. A distinction is made between general budget support and sector budget support. 
General budget support consists of un-earmarked contributions to the government’s 
39 
European Council (2013). EU/CO 37/13. Conclusions multi-annual financial framework, 8 February 2013.

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
EDF spending
During the period 2000-2011, spending under the EDF was not limited to what was available 
th th
under the 9 and 10 EDF. This is because earlier EDFs were not yet closed and payments 
th th
continued to be made from these Funds: the 6 EDF was closed on 31 July 2006 and the 7 
EDF on 31 August 2008 (see Figure 1.5). 
Figure 1.5  EDF disursement by EDF, 2003-2010 (in EUR mln)
.
.
.
.
.
.
| 72 |
.

6th EDF 7th EDF 8th EDF 9th EDF 10th EDF
th
Moreover, for the 9 EDF, the Commission decided in 2000 to transfer all unspent balances 
from EDFs prior to the date of entry into force of the Cotonou Agreement and all amounts 
th
de-committed at those dates for on-going projects under those EDFs to the 9 EDF 
th
(Commission (2004h)). Transfers to the 9 EDF eventually amounted to EUR 490 million 
th th th
from the 6 EDF, EUR 862 million from the 7 and EUR 2.5 billion from the 8 EDF, resulting 
in a total budget of some EUR 18 billion (compared with an original budget of EUR 13.8 
th
billion). For the 10 EDF, the Council made a similar decision in 2007; in this case the main 
42
results were larger budgets for regional and intra ACP programmes. 
Excluding the Investment Facility, Table 1.2 captures EDF disbursements for the main 
categories of expenditure in the period 2000-2011. Expenditures related to STABEX, SYSMIN, 
and structural adjustment concern commitments entered into under earlier EDFs. 
42 
This was in compliance with the sunset clause that was adopted with Council Decision no 2005/446/CE 
of 2005. A Joint ACP-EU Council Decision confirmed this in May 2005 (Decision No. 1/2007). See also 
Council (2006i).

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
Table 1.3 gives the distribution of EDF related decisions, assigned funds and disbursements 
until the end of 2011. The considerable share going to Africa is in line with the position of 
the Netherlands that focus should be on this continent.
Table: 1.3  EDF funding (decisions, assigned funds and disbursements) under the Cotonou  
Agreement until 2011 (in EUR  mln)
 Decisions % Assigned funds % Disbursements %
Africa (country) 19,765 15,863 12,347
Africa region 1,253 972 656
Total Africa 21,018 70% 16,835 69% 13,000 69%
Caribbean (country) 1,587 1,223 996
Caribbean region 273 168 140
Total Caribbean 1,860 6% 1,391 6% 1,136 6%
Pacific (country) 513 414 307
Pacific region 94 90 52
Total Pacific 607 2% 505 2% 359 2%
| 74 |
Regional cooperation ACP 3,028 2,921 2,410
Intra ACP allocations 2,162 1,450 853
All ACP countries 169 159 154
Administrative and  
892 3% 721 3% 693 4%
financial expenditure
Total ACP 29,737 99% 23,981 99% 18,604 99%
Total OCT 382 1% 300 1% 241 1%
Total ACP + OCT 30,119 24,281 18,846
Adapted from Commission (2012b)
Table 1.4 shows that the EDF has a strong focus on LDCs (receiving 75% of resources) and 
other low income countries (11%) as defined by OECD/DAC. This is in line with the 
Netherlands position that also among the ACP countries, aid should focus on this group. 
The shares of lower and upper middle-income countries were 6% each, with the OCT’s share 
equalling 1% of disbursements. According to ECDPM (2012), LDCs or other low-income 
countries among the ACP states have received larger shares and increases in country 
th th
allocations from the 9 to the 10 EDF than higher-income ACP countries. 

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
Table 1.5 EDF commitments per sector in the period 2005-2011 (in EUR  mln)
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Total
Social infrastructure and 711 836 852 911 1,194 1,163 1,074 6,741
services
Economic infrastructure 584 663 799 931 569 673 740 4,959
and services
Production sector 214 194 274 293 524 465 418 2,382
Multi-sector/cross cutting 72 91 156 186 217 286 207 1,215
Commodity aid and 628 635 557 477 878 1,080 672 4,927
general programme 
assistance
Action related to debt 0 80 0 0 110 114 13 317
Other (including 336 356 195 389 136 132 207 1,751
emergency and distress 
relief, administrative and 
other costs)
Total 2,545 2,855 2,833 3,187 3,628 3,913 3,331 22,292
| 76 | Figure 1.6 EDF commitments, share of main sectors (2005-2011)








Social infrastructure and services Multi-sector/cross cuing
Economic infrastructure and services Commodity aid and general programme assistance
Production sectors Action related to debt
Other (including emergency and distress relief, administrative and other costs)

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
the Commission, approves the Budget and concludes international agreements. Over the 
years, the Council formation dealing with foreign affairs and aid has gone through several 
changes; since 1 December 2009 there is the Foreign Affairs Council that is chaired by the 
HRVP, except for commercial issues; in this case the rotating EU Presidency takes over the 
chair. The Foreign Affairs Council (further referred to as the Council) brings together the EU 
Member State Ministers responsible for Foreign Affairs, Defence and Development to 
discuss foreign policy, trade, security, defence and development matters. Several working 
groups that are made up of civil servants from the Member States support the Council; the 
most important ones are the ACP Working Group, the Africa Working Group and the 
Working Group on Development Cooperation. These working groups, similar to other 
committees, are key forums for cooperation among the Member States and between 
Member States and the European institutions. A large majority of EU development 
cooperation policy proposals is discussed and agreed upon at this level. 
For Council decisions requiring a qualified majority, votes of the Member States are 
weighted: out of a total of 345 votes, the Netherlands holds 13.  A ‘blocking minority’ is 
achieved when 91 votes are against a decision. However, voting rarely happens either in the 
Council or in its Working Groups (Rood et al (2008)) and there is tendency to decide by 
47 
consensus. This is also the case with respect to the EDF.
| 78 |
Meetings of the Council are prepared by the COREPER – short for Comité des Représentants 
Permanents – that consists of the 27 permanent representatives with the rank of ambassador 
of EU Member States in Brussels. According to Rostock (2002), the COREPER should be 
thought of partly as a coordinator of council business, partly as a fixer and trouble-shooter. 
The European Parliament, with its 785 representatives from 27 Member States, ensures a form 
of democratic control by way of questions and hearings to the Commission and the Council. 
It has the right to reject the overall budget of the EU and holds the right to co-decision in 
cases of associations and accession. It is only partly engaged in the Common Foreign and 
Security Policy. Its work is organised in 20 standing committees, including the Development 
Committee. The role of the Parliament is different with respect to the EDF. Since it started, 
the EDF has remained outside the EU budget for external action: its budget is agreed upon 
by the Member States in an EDF financial protocol, managed by the Commission with 
oversight of the Member States through the EDF Committee. As a consequence, while the 
European Parliament has a co-decision role together with the Council on aid funded from 
the Budget, it does not have this position vis-à-vis the EDF; it is only involved at the 
budgetary discharge stage and has no say on the allocation of funds.
47 
See for example Smith (2004) observing that in EU foreign policy, consensus building ‘is the general 
rule’ and that ‘(in) general, the EU foreign policy system is oriented toward consensus building, 
problem-solving and the creation of common understandings, interests or reference points, which then 
form the basis for common positions or joint actions’.

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
As mentioned above, a series of specific ‘institutions’ has been set up to implement the 
Cotonou Agreement that do not exist in the same manner for other Commission aid 
instruments (though some similar set-up was introduced for ENPI): the ACP-EU Joint 
Council of Ministers; the ACP-EU Committee of Ambassadors; the ACP-EU Joint 
Parliamentary Assembly (JPA) and the ACP Secretariat.
The ACP-EU Joint Council of Ministers is a decision-making body that is made up of the 
members of the Council and their homologues from the ACP countries. It meets once a year 
to review the results of cooperation and ‘shall take such measures as may be necessary for 
the attainment of the objectives of the Convention’. The Council engages in political 
dialogue, adopts policy guidelines and takes legally binding decisions concerning the 
implementation of cooperation agreements between the ACP and the EU. 
The ACP-EU Committee of Ambassadors comprises the permanent representative of each EU 
Member State to the EU, a representative of the Commission and the head of mission of 
each ACP state to the EU in Brussels. The Committee is to assist the ACP-EU Council of 
Ministers, carry out the tasks entrusted to it by this Council and monitor the 
implementation of the Cotonou Agreement. 
| 80 | There is also a Joint Ministerial Trade Committee that discusses trade issues of interest to 
all-ACP countries and is to monitor the negotiation and implementation of the Economic 
Partnership Agreements and the Development Finance Cooperation Committee that is to 
examine the problems arising from the implementation of the cooperation.
The ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly is composed of an equal number of 
parliamentarians of the European Parliament and members of the Parliament or designated 
by the Parliament of each ACP state. The Assembly functions in principle as a consultative 
th
body that, according to the 2007 Council Regulation on the 10 EDF, should receive country 
aid programmes for information at the same time as the European Parliament. It meets twice 
a year in plenary sessions; however its role is limited. The Assembly may adopt resolutions 
and make recommendations to the Council of Ministers with a view to achieving the 
objectives of the Cotonou Agreement. The EDF contributes to the funding of the Assembly. 
The ACP Secretariat, based in Brussels and partly funded from the EDF, is responsible for 
the administrative management of the ACP group of countries. It assists the group’s 
decision-making and advisory organs in carrying out their work. In addition it has an 
important role in relation to the consultations that take place when the EDF’s Article 96 
procedure is invoked (see chapter 7): the Secretariat assists in organizing the consultation 
phase, prepares the sending of a mission by the ACP country concerned, helps it to prepare 
for the consultations, organizes meetings of the ACP group in order to discuss the situation 
and selects the ‘group of friends’.

Basic characteristics of EU aid and the European Development Fund
especially in Africa. Over a third has gone to fragile states. Between 2005 and 2011, about a third was spent 
on social infrastructure and services, 20% on economic infrastructure and services and another 20% on 
commodity aid and general programme assistance, including general budget support. The share of 
production sectors was no more than 10-13%.
Management and implementation of EU aid is entrusted to the European Commission with political control 
maintained by the Member States through the Council and, in the case of the EDF, though the EDF 
committee. There are furthermore several, Cotonou specific ‘institutions’, i.e. the ACP-EU Joint Council of 
Ministers; the ACP-EU Committee of Ambassadors; the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly and the ACP 
Secretariat. Historically, the European Parliament does not have a co-decision role together with the Council 
on aid funded from the EDF; it is only involved at the budgetary discharge stage and has no say on the 
allocation of funds.
| 82 |

2  
Dutch perspectives and  
priorities on EU aid

Dutch perspectives and priorities on EU aid
combating border-crossing infectious diseases to the international financial crisis. Its 
49
impact would be bigger than that of the smaller programmes of the Member States.   
At the same time, in line with the Maastricht Treaty, the Netherlands position was that 
development cooperation could not be entirely transferred to the European level; there 
remained a need for a national policy that was close to its citizens and that could be directly 
linked to its own foreign and security policy. 
Dutch expectations with respect to EU aid
Accepting the EU role in aid, the following paragraphs describe the Netherlands 
expectations as regards this role.
The debate on the specific features of EC aid and where it distinguishes, or ought to do so, 
from Dutch bilateral aid, is not particularly recent with the minister for Development 
Cooperation observing in 1984: ‘The Member States experience EC assistance in two ways: first, as a 
separate donor with specific characteristics and secondly as a common reference point for the pooling of their 
aid policies’. Since the Maastricht Treaty, which states that both the Commission and the 
individual EU Member States are competent to deal with aid, the issue of complementarity 
or ‘added value’ has dominated the debate – both in the Netherlands and at EU level. In the 
| 86 | Netherlands, successive ministers and state secretaries for development cooperation have 
argued that the ‘subsidiarity’ principle is leading for the Netherlands – what can better be 
handled by the Member States should not be determined by Brussels. However, clear 
definitions of complementarity or added value were never given and what it meant, the EU 
50
not to act as the ‘nth’ European donor, was never fully made clear. At the same time, the 
51
Netherlands felt that EU aid should focus on : 
•	 	Areas in which, in comparison with the individual Member States, EU aid had 
‘comparative advantages’, ‘added value’, could realise ‘economies of scale’ and had a 
52
sufficiently sizeable bag of money to be able to make a difference.
•	 	Areas in which the EU had the necessary expertise and was supposed to be good.
•	 	Areas for which the Netherlands had no or little funding or areas that were also a Dutch 
priority.
49 
See for example KST80600 (2004), KST 21501-04-117 (2010), KST 21501-04-120 (2010), KST 3300-V-2 
(2011) and KST 22112-1313 (2011).
50 
According to Holland (2002), this does not concern the Netherlands only:‘(historically) what has been 
lacking is any coherent and accepted yardstick that can determine what aspects of development 
cooperation are better done bilaterally by Member States and what are better done collectively at the 
Union level. 
51 
See for example KST 46026 (2000), KST 54810 (2001), KST 80600 (2004), Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
(2009), Samenwerken aan Mondiale Uitdagingen. Nederland en Multilaterale 
Ontwikkelingssamenwerking, KST 21501-05-116 (2010), KST 32502-1 (2010), KST 21501-04-117 (2010) 
and KST 32500-V-15 (2011).
52 
This also applied for budget support: providing budget support through the EU would create more 
leverage than when this was done by the Netherlands together with many others (KST 33240-V-10 (2012)). 

Dutch perspectives and priorities on EU aid
Table 2.1 Preferred sector focus of EU aid according to successive Dutch ministers and state  
secretaries for development cooperation
1998-2002 2002-2007 2007-2010 2010 – 2012
Integration of developing countries into 
the world economy and trade
Regional integration of developing 
countries
Macro-economic support (social sectors)
Infrastructure development
Rural development and food security
Institutional development
Good governance, judicial reform and 
human rights
Conflict prevention and fragile states
Humanitarian aid
Productive sectors
Energy
| 88 |
The following paragraphs examine the main Dutch priorities as to where and how EU aid in 
general and the EDF in particular should be implemented. 
2.2  Dutch priorities 
Poverty and Africa focus 
EU aid should focus on sustainable poverty alleviation and make a contribution to realise 
the MDGs. Particular attention was to be paid to the least developed countries. In line with 
Dutch bilateral aid since 2003, Africa ought to be high on the European agenda as well. This 
focus implied that the Commission was to deal also with the issues of peace and conflict as 
well as conflict prevention in the region, reflecting the increased integration of foreign 
57
policy, governance and security concerns and development aid on the Dutch side . Africa 
also featured predominantly in the coherence debate in the Netherlands and the role of the 
Union in this respect; ‘strategic relations with Africa’ were also essential for effective border 
control and a proper migration policy.
Political aspects of development cooperation
To the Netherlands, the key political elements of the Cotonou Agreement, namely political 
dialogue, mutual obligations, respect for core values such as human rights and good 
governance, and participation of actors other than central governments, have always been 
important.
57 
See in this respect KST 61941 (2002), KST 77487_2 (2004) and KST 99333_2 (2006).

Dutch perspectives and priorities on EU aid
Commission should focus more on budget support to countries that had the right policy 
and governance structures, as was also stipulated in the Cotonou Agreement (KST 88428-2 
(2005)). Disbursement of aid was to be based upon concrete results in institutional and 
policy reform. 
Also Koenders, who became minister for Development Cooperation in 2007, saw the 
61 
relevance of the budget support instrument and its potential usefulness. His interaction 
with the Dutch Parliament shows that he became increasingly critical on the way in which 
not only the Netherlands but also the Commission handled budget support. This change in 
position appears fuelled by mounting critique in the Parliament and Dutch media, 
experiences in Nicaragua as well as Rwanda, and the fact that the Dutch position that in 
those countries no general budget support ought to be provided had been overruled in 
Brussels.  The Dutch stand was also triggered by the Commission’s announcement that, in 
line with what had been agreed upon at Council level, it wanted to further increase the use 
th
of general budget support to some 50% of the country programmes under the 10 EDF. In 
comparison with the 3.8% of Dutch bilateral aid spent on general budget support (GBS) this 
62 63
was considered too much. According the Netherlands general budget support was not a 
blank check, certainly not for countries where the quality of governance and/or public 
financial management was doubtful. It could be used under specific circumstances, had to 
| 90 | be well justified in the political context and considering the funding needs of the country 
concerned, and should be part of an ‘intelligent modality mix’. A meaningful political 
dialogue was important and partner countries ought to have their policy and governance in 
order, also with respect to human rights. If this was not the case, the Commission needed to 
address these issues in the political dialogue, using the EU’s weight, and, if these failed, 
freeze aid entitlements. 
According to the Netherlands, the opportunities under the Cotonou Agreement for a joint 
political dialogue ought to be used better and more systematically.  Political elements ought 
to be integrated into the dialogue as had happened in the case of Madagascar and Niger, 
where the Commission’s decision to stop budget support was related to the fundamentals 
64
of their political system. Further expansion of the use of the instrument ought to go 
hand-in-hand with strengthening of the political dialogue and more concerted action of 
65
Commission and Member States , though it was acknowledged that every Member State as 
well as the Commission retained the right to decide whether to continue or stop budget 
support. The Netherlands also suggested exploring possibilities of a gradual response in 
61 
See KST 123199 (2008), KST 122600 (2008), KST 128243 (2009), KST 134337 (2009) and KST 138705 (2009).
62 
KST 122600 (2008), KST 134030 (2009), KST 128243 (2009), KST 133735 (2009) and KST 128498 (2009).
63 
KST 119634 (2008), KST 122600 (2008), KST 128243 (2009), KST 132846 (2009) and KST 134337 (2009).
64 
KST 123199 (2008), KST 138705 (2009) and KST 133735 (2009).
65 
KST 127866 (2009), KST 132846 (2009), KST 138705 (2009) and KST 13375 (2009). More cooperation was 
needed to (i) find agreement between Commission and Member States on circumstances in which 
budget support was appropriate and (ii) to be able to have a policy dialogue with the recipient countries 
which is as influential as possible, Europe having more possibilities to influence recipient government 
policies when acting ‘in Union’.

Dutch perspectives and priorities on EU aid
Text Box 2.1 The Netherlands issues paper on GBS
The paper stressed that the existing challenges regarding budget support should be 
addressed, called for a common understanding on EU budget support and advocated 
that EU Member States and the Commission should follow the same approach in the 
handling of sensitive decisions. It highlighted the following main issues: 
•	 full	exploitation	of	the	in-country	policy	dialogue
•	 	use	of	the	‘underlying	principles’	as	starting	point	for	an	in-depth	debate	on	the	
broader policies of the partner country 
•	 define	the	relationship	between	budget	support	and	Article	8	dialogues
•	 	harmonise	sensitive	Commission/EU	decisions,	‘in	particular	when	they	are	taken	
in response to political developments and irregularities that could cast doubt on 
whether budget support, or its continuation, is appropriate in a specific country’ 
•	 	document	results	and	impact	on	the	populations	of	the	recipient	countries,	as	
well as its importance for governance; and 
•	 regularly	 	discuss	progress,	results	and	impact	of	EU	aid	–	and	budget	support	in	
particular.
| 92 | Towards a coordinated EU approach (see Text Box 2.1)) and a non-paper to clarify the 
68
institutional aspects and the legal arguments put forward by the Commission.
 
The coalition agreement of the Rutte I Government of October 2010 stated that ‘budget 
support is not given in case of corruption, violation of human rights and insufficient good 
69 70
governance’ and implied a revision of the Netherlands budget support policy. The policy 
note on the future of Dutch aid of the same year echoed this general statement by 
confirming that general budget support was not to be applied when the circumstances in 
71
terms of corruption, human rights and good governance did not permit it. Its use was to 
be ‘drastically reduced’ though sector budget support could remain one of the aid 
68 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2010). The paper motivated that there was no provision in the Cotonou 
agreement precluding the EU to adhere to memorandums of understanding on budget support 
containing underlying principles related to the elements enumerated in article 9 of the Cotonou 
Agreement, nor did this Agreement limit the possibilities for the EU to take part in a policy dialogue on 
budget support also pertaining those elements. Moreover, ‘Article 61 (2) does not contain an exhaustive 
set of conditions for budget support, whereas Article 61 (5) in interplay with Article 9 (1) clearly 
mandates the Commission to take Article 9 (which concerns essential elements and fundamental 
element (IOB)) into account when deciding on/implementing budget support’.
69 
See also KST 21501-05-116 (2010), KST 21501-04-117 (2010) and KST 21501-04-132 (2011). This position is 
not too different from the one of 2009, according to which ‘an intensive dialogue on the implementa-
tion of the agreements between donors and recipient country, also on horizontal issues like good 
governance, corruption and human rights, remains intrinsically linked with the instrument of budget 
support’ (KST 138156 (2009)).
70 
This makes the Netherlands one of the donors referred to by Schiltz and Bichler (2009): ‘A good many of 
those who liked playing a more progressive role (on budget support, IOB) have become more prudent; 
some, it would seem, even regret having done so ’.
71 
KST 32500-V-15 (2010) and KST 33000-V-2 (2011).

Dutch perspectives and priorities on EU aid
Text Box 2.2 The Dutch position on trade and agriculture
On trade, the position of successive Netherlands governments was that free trade, 
lowering tariffs, abolishing export restitutions for agricultural products and industrial 
goods plus a simplification of rules of origin and removing other barriers to access to 
the EU market would encourage development and poverty reduction in developing 
countries –  apart from benefiting the open Dutch economy. The Netherlands also took 
this position in international trade negotiations. The liberalisation of world trade 
should furthermore be sustainable, include cooperation in the area of international 
corporate social responsibility and the inclusion of non-trade concerns, such as respect 
for human rights and the environment, in trade regulations. In the context of the 
negotiations on the Economic Partnership Agreements, the Netherlands also under-
lined the need for asymmetry in the EU’s new trade agreements in terms of the degree 
of market access, and in the period within which free market access would be realized.
On agriculture, the ministers of Agriculture and Development Cooperation under-
lined the importance of a common agricultural policy that was coherent with EU 
development cooperation objectives: Eventually, all national and Community 
subsidies were to be phased out (KST 61941 (2002)). This required a reform of the 
common agricultural policy, especially decoupling support measures, such as 
| 94 |
subsidies or export restitutions, from (the volume of) agricultural production. In 
December 2002 the minister for Agriculture, the state secretary for Development 
Cooperation and the state secretaries of Economic and Foreign Affairs presented a 
joint policy note ‘Beleidscoherentie Ontwikkelingssamenwerking Landbouw’ to Parliament. 
This policy note indicated that the Netherlands would focus on: (i) reform of the 
common agricultural policy –  with specific attention for agricultural commodities 
that were important for developing countries (such as rice, cotton and sugar); (ii) the 
phasing out of trade distorting subsidies; (iii) supporting developing countries in 
meeting European and international (health, etc.) standards and norms and (iv) 
increase attention for agricultural production in developing countries. The 
Netherlands saw the 2003 reform of the common agricultural policy as an important 
step in the direction of a level playing field for producers in the EU and in developing 
countries. However, further reforms were considered necessary, amongst other by 
fully decoupling direct income support, as well as increased flexibility concerning 
market access for developing countries (KST 118293 (2008)). As regards the EU 
fisheries policies, for many years, the Netherlands has been calling for the inclusion of 
the interests of fishermen in developing countries in the negotiations on fisheries 
77 
agreements between the EU and third countries. 
77 
A Council document of April 2011 states in this respect: ‘The Netherlands recognises the role of EU 
agriculture on the global markets and believes it is important to closely monitor the impact CAP policy 
changes may cause in third markets. The Netherlands therefore welcomes the Commission’s Impact 
Assessment on CAP policy changes. The Netherlands invites the Commission to include the impact of 
the CAP policy changes on farmers in third countries, especially developing countries, in its Impact 
Assessment’ (Council (2011i)).

Dutch perspectives and priorities on EU aid
live up to its agreements and statements made since preparing for the Monterrey conference 
81 82
in 2002.  While recognising the pivotal role of the partner countries , the Netherlands 
considered that closer cooperation at country level was one of the three basic principles that 
were to guide the EU’s external policy. It was one of the conditions for increasing EU aid 
effectiveness and for making more efficient use of EU aid funds. To realise this, decisions had 
to be made in the European capitals, otherwise it would remain an illusion. The Dutch 
favoured stepping up aid coordination and division of labour at EU level, also with respect to 
the EDF. Since it tallied well with its own policy, the Netherlands therefore indicated in 2007 
that it was prepared to cooperate on the implementation of the EU Code of Conduct. 
At the same time, the Netherlands stressed the need for collaboration also outside the EU 
framework, i.e. with other key players like the Bretton Woods institutions and United 
83
Nations organisations – as part of its emphasis on effective multilateralism (see Text Box 2.3 
and Annex 11 on the CD-ROM for more details) – and with a key bilateral donor such as 
Norway. Like Denmark, Sweden and UK, its position was that harmonisation and 
coordination within the Union needed to be aligned with existing initiatives rather than 
adding an additional bureaucratic layer. 
At EU level, stepping up relationships with the UN has been on the agenda since 2001. This 
| 96 | reflects a desire on the part of the EU to ‘rescue’ a cash-stricken UN, but would also allow 
the EU to play a strong role in terms of policy dialogue and promoting EU policies 
(Commission (2009n)). The UN is, amongst others, seen as key partner in and important 
source of legitimacy for EU efforts for maintaining international peace and security. This 
European commitment to effective multilateralism is also a core element of the EU’s 
external action as confirmed in Article 21 of the Lisbon Treaty. Two Commission 
communications that aimed to step up EU-UN cooperation were issued in the early years of 
the new Millennium, i.e. ‘Building an effective partnership with the United Nations in the 
fields of Development and Humanitarian Affairs’ (May 2001) and ‘The European Union and 
the United Nations: The choice of multilateralism’ (September 2003) (see further Annex 11). 
The Council and the Netherlands welcomed both, one reason for the latter being that finally 
another donor had agreed to burden sharing in funding of the UN. To create a better 
enabling environment for the EU to finance UN operations, a new EU-UN Financial and 
Administrative Framework Agreement (FAFA) was signed in April 2003. Similar agreements 
were signed with several UN specialized agencies from July 2003 onwards. In addition, 
81 
See for example KST 55526 (2001), KST 108425B (2007) and KST 132821B (2009).
82 
See e.g. KST 47517 (2000), KST 54810 (2001) and KST 70902 (2003). According to the Netherlands, views 
broadly divided the Netherlands and the Nordic+ countries on the one side, which favoured coordina-
tion in a broader spectrum, involving like-minded donors from North and considering that EU should 
not be the starting point for harmonisation, and the Commission, France and Germany on the other 
side, opting for a separate trajectory of EU coordination.
83 
See also KST 29234 (2003) and KST 99760 (2006). In 2004 it was stated as follows: ‘Alleen slagvaardige 
en geloofwaardige internationale instellingen en organisaties kunnen voorkomen dat de internationale 
betrekkingen verworden tot een «Hobbesiaanse jungle» waarin het recht van de sterkste geldt. Dat is niet in het 
belang van Nederland, noch in dat van Europa of de wereld. Nederland streeft daarom naar sterke collectieve 
instellingen, waarin alle landen elkaar op hun verantwoordelijkheden kunnen aanspreken’(KST 77487_2 (2004)).

Dutch perspectives and priorities on EU aid
As regard EU relations with the World Bank, the Commission’s aid delivery through 
the World Bank underwent significant change with the signing of the Trust Funds 
and co-financing framework Agreement in November 2001. This Agreement was 
revised in March 2003. A new Trust Funds and Co-financing Framework Agreement 
was signed in March 2009 with an initial term of 10 years. Among other things, the 
framework agreement defines the various types of eligible trust funds and sets out 
common principles and rules applicable to all of them. It also stipulates that for 
each trust fund to which the Commission contributes, an administration agreement 
is to be signed. Within the framework of the agreement, annual meetings are held 
between the Commission and the World Bank. This annual, formal dialogue, 
known as the ‘Limelette Agreement’, was put in place in 2003 (OECD (2007)).
2.3  Organisational matters 
The final section of this chapter briefly describes how the Netherlands organised itself to 
handle the EU aid dossier in Brussels. 
| 98 |
In the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in The Hague, the Department Integration Europe (‘Directie 
Integratie Europa’ (DIE)) has a pivotal role in ensuring that coherent Dutch positions are 
84
presented in the different EU bodies. Within DIE, DIE/EX (Extern EU-beleid), is responsible 
for coordination of and Dutch policy making on EU development cooperation matters. The 
Investment Facility, however, is dealt with by the Ministry of Finance.
Within the Ministry, DIE/EX consults with a range of Departments – in particular the (former) 
Department Effectiveness and Coherence, regional departments, especially the one 
responsible for Sub-Saharan Africa and thematic departments and units. Outside the 
Ministry, it coordinates in particular with the Ministries of Economic Affairs, Agriculture 
and Innovation and of the Interior and Kingdom Relations as well as Justice and Security. 
DIE/EX prepares the minister/state secretary for the General Affairs and External Relations 
Council meetings (since 2009 split up into a General Affairs Council and a Foreign Affairs 
Council) and the informal Development Council. It plays a central role in the exchanges 
between Government and Parliament thus allowing Parliament to exercise its controlling 
functions. DIE/EX supports the minister/state secretary in parliamentary debates on Council 
84 
For a number of policy areas, since preparation of some topics is not dealt with by COREPER but in 
special committees, coordination is in the hands of other ministries. This is the case for trade (Trade 
Policy Committee) and the Special Committee for Agriculture for which the Ministry of Economic 
Affairs, Agriculture and Innovation is responsible. European Monetary Union matters are dealt with by 
the Ministry of Finance in the Economic and Financial Affairs Council. Preparations of the Justice and 
Home Affairs Council are chaired by the Ministry of Justice while the strategic European agenda and 
coordination of the Council of Europe are in the hands of the Ministry of General Affairs. 

Dutch perspectives and priorities on EU aid
countries, i.e. Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Ireland, and the UK, a more varied and more ad 
87
hoc pattern of Dutch friends has emerged over the years :
 
•	 in the late 1990s and early years of the new Millennium, the UK on using	 remaining EDF 
88
funds for debt alleviation/reduction , on the poverty focus of EU development spending,  
and policy coherence for development;
•	 	Denmark, Germany, Sweden and UK on the Commission’s reform process;
•	 the UK and Sweden on trade policy;	
•	 	Germany and Sweden, sharing a critical position on general support, together with 
Denmark, though the latter changed its position after the new Government came into 
power (October 2011) and 
•	 	Spain and France on migration and development.
Other instruments that are used by the Netherlands to influence EU aid policy making, 
include (a) its official reactions to the Commission’s green papers (e.g. on the future of EU 
budget support to third countries and on increasing the impact of EU development policy); 
(b) position papers and non-papers, including a Joint position paper on Development 
Co-operation in the new Treaty for the European Union ((2003) (prepared together with 
Austria, Belgium, Germany, Ireland, Sweden and the UK), a non-paper on security and 
| 100 | development in 2005 and a non-paper on conditions for budget support in May 2009 and (c) 
having Dutch civil servants seconded to the Commission and the new European External 
Action Service  – the so-called ‘Experts Nationals Détachés’, that are to  bring along a ‘Dutch 
perspective’ that would allow the Netherlands to indirectly exert influence at an early stage 
89 
of the aid policy making process.
 
Summary of main findings
The Netherlands has argued the importance of EU aid from different angles: it serves national interests, gives 
body to the Netherlands when addressing global issues, could complement Dutch bilateral aid in certain 
sectors and countries, and is a channel for realizing the Dutch aim of poverty reduction. In addition, a legal 
argument has been used: the EU role in aid is agreed upon as part of the EU treaties. At the same time, in line 
with the Maastricht Treaty, the Netherlands position has been that development cooperation could not be 
entirely transferred to the European level.
87 
See KST 41492 (1999), KST 29234 (2003), KST 77546 (2004), KST 99333_2 (2006) and KST 21501-04-139 
(2011).
88 
In 2006 it was stated that the Dutch position on the debt dossier differed from the UK (KST 94045 (2006)).
89 
In 2011, three seconded civil servants were based at DEVCO, dealing with policy coherence, SRHR, and 
aid effectiveness. They were part of a group of 43 Dutch working at DEVCO (close to 4% of a total staff 
of some 1,200). In the same year, 64 Dutch citizens were employed at the EEAS, with 8 leading an EU 
Delegation (KST 33001-1 (2012)). In comparison, DFID has set aside GBP 14 million for the period 
2011-2015 for the secondment of some 25-30 experts (in areas ranging from Water and Sanitation, 
Fragile States, Conflict Prevention and Resolution to overall Evaluation and Monitoring) to the 
Commission and related organisations in Brussels and Luxembourg, EU delegations in developing 
countries and to the EEAS.

3 
EU generic aid policies

EU generic aid policies
3.1  A European Community Development Cooperation 
Policy (2000)
In May 1999, the Council agreed that it was about time for the Union to come up with an 
integrated, strategic and up-to-date statement on development policy, based on the broad 
goals set out in the Maastricht Treaty (Council (1999b)). This statement was to have multiple 
functions, i.e. (i) create an overall profile of EU aid and strengthen its focus, (ii) provide a 
general framework for prioritising objectives, policies and fields of action, (iii) enhance 
coherence between aid and the Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy as well as its 
external economic policy and (iv) contribute to increased complementarity between 
Member States and Commission. 
In response to this statement, the Commission came with its Communication ‘European 
Community Development Co-operation Policy’ in April 2000. Reducing poverty, while 
already incorporated into the Cotonou Agreement of June 2000, became for the first time 
the overarching objective of all EU aid programmes, supporting ‘action that would enable 
developing countries to fight poverty themselves’ (Commission (2000a)). The Council 
welcomed the document and its explicit focus on poverty, the poorest countries, including 
countries ‘where a large part of the population is poor’ (Council (2000e) and on areas in 
| 104 | which EU aid could ‘offer comparative advantages’. This agreement provided the basis for 
the joint statement on the European Community’s Development Policy of November 2000 
(see Text Box 3.1). 
Text Box 3.1 Basics of the Joint Statement on the European Community’s Development Policy
The main objective of the Community’s development policy is ‘to reduce and, 
eventually, to eradicate poverty’. ‘This objective entails support for sustainable 
economic and social and environmental development, promotion of the gradual 
integration of the developing countries into the world economy and a determina-
tion to combat inequality’. Community development policy must support poverty 
reduction strategies and aim at ‘consolidating the democratic process, peace and 
the prevention of conflict, the development of social policies, the integration of 
social and environmental aims in macro-economic reform programmes, respect for 
equality between men and women, the reform or introduction of an appropriate 
institutional framework, the strengthening of public and private sector capabilities 
and natural disaster preparedness’. 

EU generic aid policies
Text Box 3.2 Key elements of the European Consensus
The earlier aim of poverty reduction became ‘the eradication of poverty in the 
context of sustainable development’, including pursuit of the MDGs. Development 
became a central goal by itself, with sustainable development including good 
governance, human rights and political, economic, social and environmental 
aspects.’ Human rights and good governance became not only areas to be 
mainstreamed, but also objectives in their own right, complementing poverty 
reduction’ (Commission (2006i)). The document provided a common framework of 
principles and concrete actions to guide aid of the Commission and of the Member 
States, ranging from national ownership and partnership, political dialogue, 
participation of civil society, gender equality to a commitment to preventing state 
fragility. Central element was the promotion of common values in the dialogue 
with third countries: ‘respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms, peace, 
democracy, good governance, gender equality, the rule of law, solidarity and 
justice’. Aid would continue to focus on the LDCs, and, where appropriate, the 
preferred aid modality would be budget support. The Consensus stipulates that the 
Commission will aim to provide added value by: 
•	 ensuring	a	global	presence;	
| 106 |
•	 ensuring	PCD	in	Community	actions;
•	 promoting	the	development	of	best	practice;	
•	 	facilitating	coordination	and	harmonization	and	promotion	of	‘coordination,	
complementarity and coherence as the EU contribution to the wider internatio-
nal agenda for aid effectiveness’;
•	 	acting	as	a	‘delivery	agent	in	areas	where	size	and	critical	mass	are	of	special	
importance’;
•	 	promoting	democracy,	human	rights,	good	governance	and	respect	for	internati-
onal law, with special attention given to transparency and anti-corruption and 
•	 by	‘putting	into	effect	the	principle	of	participation	of	civil	society’.	
Moreover, the Community would be active primarily in the following areas, a 
number of which were to be considered as its comparative advantage: (i) trade and 
regional integration; (ii) the environment and the sustainable management of 
natural resources; (iii) infrastructure, communications and transport; (iv) water and 
energy; (v) rural development, territorial planning, agriculture and food security; 
(vi) governance, democracy, human rights and support for economic and institutio-
nal reforms; (vii) conflict prevention and fragile states; and (viii) human 
development. 
The Netherlands agreed to the Consensus as it was based on common goals (poverty 
alleviation, MDGs) and common agreements on ODA targets, alignment, harmonization 
and coordination, and the importance attached to ownership of the partner countries and 
the participation of civil society. At the same time, it underlined that aid remained a shared 

EU generic aid policies
Stressing that coordination was essential if the EU’s aid policy was to achieve maximum impact, 
the Council once more asked Commission and Member States to address the issues mentioned 
above. It also called for efforts to better align country strategies with a broader framework such 
as a PRSP, to harmonise procedures and financial rules, and for a more ‘pro-active’ engagement 
in the coordination arrangements established by the Bretton Woods institutions and the UN. 
The joint statement of November 2000 on the European Community’s Development Policy 
reflected the above Council position. It promised that the EU would step up coordination, 
recognised the leading role of the recipient countries in this coordination and announced that 
the EU would enhance relations with the UN and the Breton Woods institutions. The 
importance of the Union speaking with one voice was underlined as well. Nevertheless, the 
Council repeated its call to step up coordination, to reinforce partner countries’ role in 
defining development strategies and to take concrete steps in the co-ordination of policies and 
harmonisation of procedures in 2001 and 2004. The Council also asked for a ‘strong and 
substantive contribution’ to the Second International High Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness 
98 
that saw the adoption of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness in March 2005.
 With the ink of the Paris Declaration barely dry, the Council came with new set of 
conclusions on complementarity and division of labour in October 2006, repeating its 
earlier position and reiterating that progress in these areas was vital (Council (2006p)). 
| 108 | These conclusions also indicate a commitment of Commission and Member States to focus 
on a limited number of sectors or themes in each partner country, to further discuss issues 
of aid modalities and choice of aid instruments, to implement the joint programming 
framework that was agreed upon earlier and to deal with issues of cross-country and 
cross-sector complementarity (Council (2006p)).
The above developments culminated finally in a Commission proposal to enhance 
complementarity and division of labour amongst Community and Member States in 
developing countries (Commission (2007a)). To the Commission, ‘(cutting) red tape, 
putting the money where it is needed most, pooling aid, dividing the job in order to deliver 
more aid, better and faster’ were its objectives in a nutshell.  The Council adopted the EU 
Code of Conduct on Division of labour in Development Policy (see Text Box 3.3) in May 
98 
In the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness Ownership, Harmonisation, Alignment, Results and Mutual 
Accountability – on coordination, signatories made a commitment to inter alia (i) Strengthen partner 
countries’ national development strategies and associated operational frameworks; (ii) Increase 
alignment of aid with partner countries’ priorities, systems and procedures and helping to strengthen 
their capacities; (iii) Eliminate duplication of efforts and rationalise donor activities to make them as 
cost-effective as possible and (iv) Reform and simplify donor policies and procedures to encourage 
collaborative behaviour and progressive alignment with partner countries’ priorities, systems and 
procedures. The Declaration calls for a pragmatic approach to the division of labour and burden 
sharing, that can increase complementarity and can reduce transaction costs. Donors committed 
themselves to ‘(make) full use of their respective comparative advantage at sector or country level by 
delegating, where appropriate, authority to lead donors for the execution of programmes, activities 
and tasks’ and to ‘work together to harmonise separate procedures’. The Declaration also entails a joint 
commitment to ‘(reform) procedures and strengthen incentives .. for management and staff to work 
towards harmonisation, alignment and results’.

EU generic aid policies
In an attempt to support implementation of the Code, the Commission came with a 
proposal for a Fast Track Initiative (FTI) of Division of Labour in December 2007. It also 
developed an EU Toolkit for in-country division which mentioned the following priority 
areas for Community aid: 
•	 	trade and regional integration 
•	 	environment and the sustainable management of natural resources 
•	 	infrastructure, communications and transport
•	 water and energy	
•	 	rural development, territorial planning, agriculture and food security
•	 	governance, democracy, human rights and support for economic and institutional 
reforms
•	 prevention of conflicts and of state fragility and	
•	 	human development and social cohesion and employment. 
Thus, while the European Consensus emphasised the need for the EU to concentrate upon 
its areas of comparative advantage, these are broadly defined, with the number increasing 
from six in the original Development Policy Statement to nine in the European Consensus 
(Barder et al (2010)). However, without indicating a division of responsibilities within the 
| 110 | Community, i.e. between Commission and Member States. Furthermore, the so-called 
cross-cutting issues, i.e. democracy, good governance, human rights, the rights of children 
and indigenous peoples, gender quality, environmental sustainability, and the fight against 
HIV/AIDS were to be mainstreamed into EU development activities.
In 2008, the Council announced that at the High Level Forum in Accra the EU would focus 
on ‘division of labour, predictability of aid, enhanced use of country systems and mutual 
accountability for development results’ (Council (2008d)). The Council agreed that more 
was to be done in the implementation of in-country division of labour. Moreover, while ‘the 
EU should continue to be present in all developing countries’, Member States should focus 
‘on those countries where their added value is the greatest in the fight for poverty 
99
eradication in the context of sustainable development’. 
In November 2009, the Council adopted Conclusions on an Operational Framework on Aid 
Effectiveness. A consolidated version of this Operational Framework was released in January 
2011. It has the following main components to reduce aid fragmentation and donor 
proliferation: (i) accelerate the Fast Track Initiative on Division of Labour of 2007; (ii) pursue 
sector-concentration through redeployment and joint programming; (iii) monitor progress 
systematically at headquarters and country level and (iv) cooperate on training activities for 
division of labour and cross-country division of labour.
99 
The Council furthermore reiterated its position on the lead of the partner country in the country 
division of labour and its commitments in channelling increasing amounts of aid through budget 
support. The Council also called on Commission and Member States to step up co-financing, increase 
aid predictability and to continue and extend the use and coverage of multi-year country strategy 
papers (Council (2008d)).

EU generic aid policies
3.4  Policy Coherence for Development 
The legal basis for policy coherence for development (PCD) goes back to the Maastricht 
104
Treaty of 1992. The Amsterdam Treaty of 1997 added the principle of consistency of all of 
the Union’s external activities ‘in the context of its external relations, security, economic 
and development policies’, implying that no single policy area should be pursued at the 
expense of others (Olsen (2008)). The provision on PCD was strengthened in the Lisbon 
Treaty (Klavert et al (2011)), reconfirming the earlier stipulations of Maastricht. PCD is also 
referred to in Article 12 of the Cotonou Agreement, stating amongst others that ‘(the) Union 
acknowledges that Union policies, other than development policy, can support the 
development priorities of ACP countries in line with this Agreement. On this basis, the 
European Union will enhance the coherence of these policies with a view to attaining the 
105
objectives of this Agreement’.
In the period 1997-2003, the Council underlined the importance of ensuring a ‘maximum 
level of policy coherence’ and of avoiding that other Community and Member States’ 
policies had negative effects on Community development actions (Council (2000e)). The 
Council also asked for ‘overall coherence’ between the Union’s ‘internal and external 
policies’ (Council (2003a)). The Commission was asked to check all her policy proposals on 
| 112 | possible incoherencies and to regularly report on its initiatives in this domain. Reacting to 
these concerns, the Commission came with its ‘Communication on Policy coherence for 
development’ in April 2005. This Communication identified twelve policy areas for which 
achieving synergies with development policy objectives was particularly relevant (see Text 
Box 3.4). Though acknowledging the importance of the Communication as a political 
statement, OECD (2007) considered it ‘more of a statement of general objectives than a 
targeted listing of policy incoherence priorities’ and suggested that the list of twelve policy 
areas be prioritized, focusing on issues where potential policy incoherence was greatest or 
106
where synergies could be maximized.
104 
The Treaty states that ‘(the) Union shall in particular ensure the consistency of its external activities as a 
whole in the context of its external relations, security, economic and development policies’ and that  
‘(the) Community shall take account of the objectives referred to in Article 130u in the policies that it 
implements which are likely to affect developing countries.’
105 
The Article furthermore states that the Community shall regularly inform the Secretariat of the ACP 
Group of planned proposals for measures that might affect the interests of the ACP states and that at 
the request of these states ‘consultations shall be held promptly so that account may be taken of their 
concerns as to the impact of those measures before any final decision is made’. 
106 
The same policy areas were mentioned in the Council conclusions of November 2007 (Council (2007s)) 
and of 2010 (Council (2010k) and (2010p)). Member States and Commission were asked ‘to continue 
monitoring and improving PCD in the twelve policy areas’ and the Commission was asked to ensure 
‘better integration of the PCD approach into Country and Regional Strategy Papers’. In 2008 and 2009, 
the Council reaffirmed its position (Council (2008d), (2008f) and (2009k)).

EU generic aid policies
In September 2009, the Commission came with its Communication ‘Policy Coherence for 
Development – Establishing the policy framework for a whole-of-the-Union approach’ 
(Commission (2009h)). According to the Commission, it reflected recent developments 
such as increasing non-ODA financial flows to developing countries and, more importantly, 
the growing impact of internal EU policies on external relations. From the initial twelve policy 
areas, the Commission proposed to move to five (climate change, global food security, 
migration, intellectual property rights and security and development) as these were: 
(i)  high on the EU’s political agenda, 
(ii) considered important for developing countries and for achieving the MDG’s and 
(iii) presented concrete opportunities for incorporating development objectives. 
The Council appreciated the approach suggested by the Commission but replaced 
intellectual property rights by trade and finance, while keeping the other four priorities 
proposed (Council (2009k) and (2010p)). Like the Commission, the Council thus moved 
away from a broader PCD agenda towards a set of political priorities that reflected the 
107
priorities of the Union, not necessarily those of developing countries. The five priorities 
were reconfirmed by the Council in May 2012 as issues to be addressed in the ‘immediate 
future’; at the same time it was acknowledged that ‘(the) EU’s development policy requires a 
| 114 | more ambitious approach to PCD in the twelve areas identified in 2005 and a more 
pro-active integration of development objectives into EU policies and external action’ 
(Council (2012a)).  It was underlined moreover that since PCD was also essential for the 
credibility of the EU as a global actor, ‘a strong EU leadership on PCD issues at high levels of 
all parts of the EU and in Member States’ was important. 
The Commission has issued three reports on PCD since 2007. While academia and NGOs 
have been critical on the way in which EU policies, in particular in trade and agriculture, 
108
have affected developing countries , there is a ‘lack of sufficient evidence on the actual 
effects of EU policies in developing countries due to a lack of investment in research’ (Görtz 
and Keijzer (2012)). Also the Commission’s country evaluation reports hardly touch upon 
the issue of PCD and those that do show great variety in terms of terminology and 
thoroughness of analysis (see Text Box 3.5). 
107 
An European Parliament resolution of 18 May 2010 stressed in this respect that the ‘Council’s decision 
to focus on five broad areas for the PCD exercise in 2009 must not replace the monitoring of the 12 
traditional policy areas’ referred to above (European Parliament (2010c)).
108 
E.g. Action Aid (2003) referred to the detrimental impact of the Union’s rules of origin and food safety and 
sanitary and phytosanitary standards on Kenya’s horticultural and fisheries sectors that had seen 
considerable EU investments The European Parliament (2010e) referred to the increased use of farmland in 
developing countries for agro fuel production to meet the EU’s renewable energy needs – which is at the 
expense of food security and biodiversity – and the re-introduction of export subsidies for dairy products in 
2009. Guerrin et al (2011)) referred to high tariffs for semi-processed and final goods, rules of origin that 
undermine the positive potential impact of the General System of Preferences and a migration policy that 
still appears to be ‘how to prevent more migration’ and runs counter to policies that aim to attract highly 
skilled migrants. Dornberg (2011) referred to the special status of sugar and rice under the Cotonou 
Agreement and EPAs and the challenges faced by the EU in reforming its Common Agricultural Policy. 

EU generic aid policies
differentiated depending on the countries’ state of economic development. EU aid is to be 
allocated according to country needs, capacities, commitments and performance as well as 
potential impact. This is not too different from what was stated over 12 years ago with 
respect to the Cotonou Agreement which ‘made such differentiated treatment explicit by 
labelling differentiation’ as a fundamental principle of the ACP-EU partnership’ (ECDPM 
(2012). This was, as mentioned above, a key change compared to the previous Lomé 
Conventions that determined allocations on an ‘entitlement’ basis’. Differentiation is also 
part and parcel of the European Consensus of 2005.
The Agenda announces that more attention will be paid to the partner countries’ 
commitment to ‘fundamental values of human rights, democracy and rule of law’ as a basis 
for differentiation in aid allocations. Another characteristic of the differentiated approach is 
that countries that can generate enough resources to ensure their own development will no 
110
longer receive bilateral grant aid and will instead benefit from new forms of partnership. 
Nevertheless, they will continue to receive funds through thematic and regional programmes. 
Countries like China, Brazil and India are regarded as partners for addressing global 
111
challenges. The Commission proposes that EU aid should centre on :
•	 H	 uman rights, democracy and good governance or the rule of law, including support to 
| 116 | free and fair elections, media freedom and Internet access, support for judicial systems, 
public sector management, tax policy and administration, tackling corruption and 
strengthening of civil society and the importance of the development-security nexus.
•	 	Social inclusion and human development (notably social protection, health and 
education).
•	 	Investments in ‘drivers for inclusive and sustainable economic growth, providing the 
backbone of efforts to reduce poverty’, with attention for business environment and 
112
regional integration, and support for development of competitive local private sectors. 
•	 	Helping reduce developing countries’ exposure to global shocks such as climate change, 
ecosystem and resource degradation, and volatile and escalating energy and agricultural 
113
prices, by concentrating investment in sustainable agriculture and energy.
 
110 
According to ECDPM (2012), views ‘differ strongly’ as to whether the proposed discontinuation of 
bilateral assistance to upper middle-income countries (UMICs) and countries representing more than 
1% of the world’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) can also be applied under the Cotonou Agreement. 
111 
This focus was agreed upon at Council level, with the Council concluding in May 2012 that it endorsed 
‘the EU’s intended focus on governance and inclusive and sustainable growth and the priorities in these 
areas set out in the Commission Communication’ (Council (2012a)).
112 
This includes amongst others small and medium enterprise promotion, better access to business and 
financial services as well as private and foreign investments, improving infrastructure, promoting 
agricultural, industrial and innovation policies, as well as aid for trade and trade facilitation. 
113 
In agriculture, aid is to focus on smallholder agriculture and rural livelihoods, formation of producer 
groups, the supply and marketing chain, and government efforts to facilitate responsible private 
investment. In energy, priorities include: addressing price volatility and energy security; climate change, 
including access to low carbon technologies; and access to secure, affordable, clean and sustainable 
energy services.

EU generic aid policies
To the Netherlands, the Agenda for Change reflected to large extent its expectations. It 
116
specifically welcomed the proposed : 
•	 	Focus, as mentioned above, as this would allow for both EU’s added value and European 
and Dutch interest being served. 
•	 	The suggestion to differentiate between different categories of countries, which would 
however require objective criteria, and the specific commitment to fragile states.
•	 	Sector focus, as it showed the complementary between European and Dutch aid policies, 
including the emphasis on private sector development. The Netherlands was pleased with 
the suggested input target of 20% of EU aid for the social sectors as this would 
compensate for the Dutch decision to withdraw from the education sector.
•	 	The proposed use of innovative ways of financing development.  
The Netherlands was also in favour of a joint EU effort in partner countries through division of 
labour and joint programming, though it was realised that not all Member States were likely 
to share this position. However, ‘(there) can be no question of a straitjacket that the EU 
imposes to the Member States. Development cooperation is defined in the EU treaty as a 
parallel, shared competence. The proposals of the Commission should keep open the 
possibility for varying degrees of intensity of coordination, ranging from sharing information, 
117
| 118 | developing joint strategies or jointly executing programmes’ (KST 21501-04-137 (2011)). They 
should allow for a ‘bottom-up’ to coordination and division of labour, including the 
possibility of a Member State rather than the Commission ensuring a coordinating role.
118
3.6  Budget support as the preferred aid modality
Early experience with the equivalent of budget support in the 1990s showed (i) the limits of 
conditionality as an effective means of promoting reforms; (ii) the importance of partner 
countries owning policies; and (iii) the limited effect of targeting funds to specific budget 
116 
See e.g. KST 21501-03-139 (2011), KST 21501-02-1129 (2012), KST 21501-20-628 (2012), KST 21501-02-1179 
(2012), KST 33240-V-1 (2012) and KST 21501-04-147 (2012). For a more critical appraisal see e.g. Mackie et 
al (2010b), underling that ‘(as) it stands the Green Paper does little to encourage a break with the past’ and 
lacks both political-economy analysis and ‘in-depth questioning of how the EU would like to conduct its 
development business in the future’.  Since the Commission ‘is not known for its work with the private 
sector’, ‘(making) this the focus of its future strategy .. suggests a need for a more profound debate on 
procedures and the comparative advantages of the Commission in relation to those of the member states 
and the European Investment Bank’. Moreover, ‘PCD is mentioned in the paper, but not as an overarching 
framework that would give development funds leverage over other areas such as climate and energy’.
117 
A quite similar position was taken by DFID in 2012 stating that ‘(joined) up working within the EU must 
therefore be pragmatic, flexible, open to other donors, reduce transaction costs and adapted to the 
realities on the ground. Our work together as EU donors should recognise this and we should steer clear of 
EU-led mandatory processes and resist plans to regulate or impose a single approach to joint 
programming’(DIFD (2012)).
118 
This section builds on inter alia Commission (2000d), the European Consensus on Development (Official 
Journal of the European Union. 24 February 2006), Commission (2007k), Commission (2008o), Council 
(2008g), Fischer et al (2008), Schmidt (2008) and Commission (2011i).

EU generic aid policies
121
aid conditions that could undermine the effectiveness of the instrument. This diversity stems 
to a large extent from diverging views on whether development aid in general and budget 
support in particular are/should be instruments of foreign policy – or not – and whether they 
122
can and should be used to realize Europe’s political aims. 
Against this background, the Commission launched a public consultation on the basis of a 
green paper on ‘The future of EU budget support to third countries’ (Commission (2010g)) in 
October 2010. The paper incorporated some of the main elements of non-paper that had been 
prepared by the Netherlands (e.g. on political governance and the role of political dialogue, 
programming of budget support and its coherence with other instruments and dealing with 
123
fraud and corruption). The Dutch position on the green paper is summarised in Text Box 3.6.
Text Box 3.6 The Dutch position on the green paper on budget support
•	 Lik	 e the Netherlands, the Commission ought to be more restrained: when in 
doubt on whether the basic conditions in the areas of good governance, fighting 
corruption and human rights were met, no general budget support should be 
provided. In consultation with the Member States, the Commission ought to 
judge more strictly whether these basic conditions were present and whether the 
support would indeed give the results for which it was intended. Ultimately this 
| 120 |
should result in less money going through this instrument – and ultimately less 
money going to the EU’s budget for foreign relations 
•	 	Improved coordination in the use of budget support between Member States 
and Commission was important. Signals coming from the Member States that 
they were increasingly reluctant to use the instrument were to be properly 
addressed at EU level. 
•	 	A stronger dialogue on these basic conditions was needed as the Commission 
was often found to be ‘too restraint’ in this respect. The dialogues on budget 
support and the Article 8 dialogue should be complementary and mutually 
reinforcing. In case of general budget support, it should be possible to address 
also ‘broader political developments’ in such a dialogue. 
•	 	The Netherlands was in principle against EU budget support for fragile states, unless, 
in exceptional cases, and to be determined on a case-by-case basis, the Government 
considered that it could make an important contribution to stability and security. 
Following these public consultations, the Commission issued its Communication on The 
future approach to EU budget support to third countries in October 2011. This 
Communication calls for a coordinated EU approach, towards a ‘single EU Good Governance 
121 
ST 132847 (2009), KST 138705 (2009), KST 21501-05-116 (2010) and KST 21501-04-117 (2010).
122 
See for example Barder et al (2010), European Parliament (2011f) and ODI (2011).
123 
In the midst of this debate, in 2010 the Commission cancelled or delayed budget aid disbursements for 
reasons of corruption (Zambia), concerns about public financial management and transparency 
(Cambodia, Uganda) or eligibility concerns (Malawi, DRC, Saint Kitts & Nevis) (Commission (2011r)).

EU generic aid policies
The Netherlands furthermore announced, despite earlier suggestions on reforming comitology 
and Council, that it would be ‘very critical’ on individual budget support proposals from the 
Commission when it felt that conditions for general budget support were not met.  Without a 
veto right, it would try to resist such decisions though it was realised that not too much was to be 
127
expected given the decision-making rules of the structures in Brussels. Moreover, as was stated 
in 2012, EU general budget support would not disappear entirely and would remain an important 
instrument which, if well applied, could also be effective’ (Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2012b)). 
At Council level, discussions took place in the first months of 2012 resulting in the Council 
Conclusions of May 2012. The Council endorsed the objectives set out in the Commission’s 
Communication and welcomed the intention to address the aforementioned challenges (see 
Text Box 3.7). 
Text Box 3.7 Main elements of the Council Conclusions of May 2012 on budget support
•	 	EU	budget	support	must	be	designed	and	implemented	‘to	effectively	support	
poverty reduction and sustainable development’ and to ‘strengthen the 
contractual, reciprocal nature of partnerships between the EU and partner 
countries’. It ‘should reflect the specific goals, benefits and risks, as well as 
feasibility in each partner country, in the mix with the other support modalities in 
| 122 |
that context’. Different types of budget support contracts will be used ‘to better 
respond to the political, economic and social context of the partner country’. 
This contractual aspect of budget support was supported by the Netherlands
•	 	EU budget support must be aligned with country strategies, targeted where it is 
needed most, where domestic resources are insufficient and where it can have 
the greatest impact. It ‘should and must be based on mutual accountability and a 
commitment to human rights, democracy and the rule of law’. The commitment 
and record of partner countries in these areas is to be ‘one of the key determi-
nants of EU development cooperation, including general and sector budget 
support, and should be assessed to determine if using budget support is 
128
appropriate’ . General budget support can be given when there is ‘trust that it 
will contribute to effective development impact and will be spent in accordance 
with shared objectives and values, in particular human rights, democracy and the 
rule of law, as well as public sector reform and financial management, including 
domestic accountability and stronger national control mechanisms’. Furthermore, 
the EU will use ‘a tailor-made and dynamic approach to eligibility, focusing on 
progress in the implementation of credible and relevant sector reform strategies, 
to maximise the impact on the ground’.
127 
See KST 21501-04-117 (2010), Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2012b), KST 21501-04-142 (2012) and KST 
21501-01-148 (2012).  
128 
The Netherlands welcomed this focus, with Member States supporting a more political approach to budget 
support, not in the least to maintain support (‘draagvlak’) for this instrument (KST 21501-04-143 (2012)). 

EU generic aid policies
The Council also stressed the role of the African Union (founded in 2002) and the sub-
129 
regional organisations in African peacekeeping and conflict resolution efforts.
In December 2005, the Council agreed to the Commission’s Communication ‘The EU and 
Africa: Towards a Strategic Partnership strategy’ (Council (2006a)). Like the European Consensus, 
this strategy was a common and co-ordinated European initiative and to be a framework for 
130
action for both Member States and the Commission. Focusing on growth, trade and good 
and effective governance as well as the MDGs and the conditions needed to reach them 
(Commission (2006j)), it reflected the EU’s position that Africans should steer Africa’s 
development. Particular attention was paid to peace and security as key requirements for 
sustainable development (as was reflected in the earlier decision to establish the African 
Peace Facility) as well as interconnectivity. The Netherlands supported the principles of the 
Strategy as these were virtually identical to those of its own policy vis-à-vis the continent 
(KST 99760 (2006)). It was convinced that a common strategy would contribute to increasing 
aid to Africa and to deploying it more effectively (KST 91959 (2005)). At the same time, the 
Netherlands made clear that this EU strategy would not touch upon its own policy.
While in 2006 the Council reiterated its commitment to contribute ‘to the African efforts to 
achieve the Millennium Development Goals’ (Council (2006s)), progress in implementing 
| 124 | the Africa strategy was slow. One important reason was that Africa and the European Union 
had different priorities: the African side emphasized mainly economic and trade issues, 
including those regarding external debt while the European side stressed peace and security 
 131
issues. At the same time, there was a resurgence of Africa’s strategic importance, due to 
security matters or for economic reasons (oil and other raw materials) and the rise of new 
economic and political actors.  On the European side, the CFSP and the European Security 
and Defence Policy, adopted in 2003, furthermore bore out the ambition for greater 
political projection of ‘the EU-as-one’ in the international arena. Against this background, a 
key political goal became by 2007 to transform the EU Strategy for Africa into a joint one. 
In June 2007, the Commission therefore came with its proposal ‘From Cairo to Lisbon – the 
EU-Africa Strategic Partnership’ together with a Joint Commission-Council Secretariat Paper 
entitled ‘Beyond Lisbon: making the EU-Africa partnership work’ and finally a draft of the Joint 
Strategy, its eight thematic partnerships and its first Action Plan (2008-2010) (Commission 
(2008a)). ‘The Strategy aims to take dialogue and cooperation ‘beyond development’ (i.e. 
focusing on a wider range of policy areas, such as peace and security, energy or climate 
change), ‘beyond Africa’ (looking at a series of global issues which directly affect Africa’s 
development) and ‘beyond institutions’ (involving a wider spectrum of non-traditional 
actors from civil society, the private sector and academia)’ (European Parliament (2009d)). 
129 
Council (2004e), (2005d), (2006s) and (2007m).
130 
It followed the European Council decision of June 2005 to provide more and better development aid, to 
increase the speed of implementation and to focus aid in particular on Africa by collectively allocating 
at least 50% of the agreed increase in ODA resources to the African continent, respecting the priorities 
of the various Member States (Council (2005d)).
131 
See e.g. ECDPM (2010a) and Tywuschik and Sherriff (2009).

EU generic aid policies
Nevertheless, the third Africa-EU Summit of November 2010 once more demonstrated the Union’s 
commitment to the Strategic Partnership of 2007. According to the Commission, ‘(the) 
Communication ‘Consolidation of EU-Africa relations: 1.5 billion people, 80 countries, two 
continents, one future’, adopted few weeks before the Summit, had contributed to set the tone: it 
highlighted the urgent need to better cooperate on the international stage, to promote shared 
interests and take up together the new opportunities and global challenges in the areas of peace 
and security, climate change, regional integration and private sector development, infrastructure 
and energy, agriculture and food security, migration’(Commission (2011v)).
Summary of main findings
The period 2000 to 2012 has seen a series of important EU aid policies being developed and agreed upon at 
Council level. These include the European Community Development Cooperation Policy (2000), the European 
Consensus for Development (2005), the EU Code of Conduct on Division of Labour (2007), the Policy Coherence 
for Development – Establishing the policy framework for a whole-of-the-Union approach (2009) and most 
recently Increasing the impact of EU development policy: an Agenda for Change (2011). From a Dutch perspective, 
important are furthermore the policy developments on budget support and the policies related to Africa. Though 
the Netherlands may not always have achieved all that it wanted in terms of generic aid policies, by and large, 
| 126 | both these policies, and what have been the core aims and principles of the Cotonou Agreement converge to a 
considerable extent with Dutch aid priorities. This is recapitulated in the following overview.
Dutch priorities
Poverty alleviation 
Poorest countries – based on needs 
and performance
Integration developing countries into 
world economy
Country ownership and alignment with 
national strategies
Values: human rights, governance, rule 
of law, democracy
Political dialogue
Security-development nexus
Division of labour, sector focus and EU 
coordination 
Policy coherence for development 
MDGs
Civil society involvement
European 
Community’s 
Development 
Policy (2000)
European 
Consensus for 
Development 
(2005)
EU Code of 
Conduct (2007)
Policy Coherence 
for Development 
(2009)
Agenda for Change 
(2011)
Cotonou 
Agreement (2000 
and revisions 2005 
and 2010)

Part II
Management matters

4
Aid management reform – 
focus on Brussels

Aid management reform – focus on Brussels
•	 	Comitology and working group procedures were to be adjusted so that discussions would 
focus on aid programming, questions of strategy, coherence and issues requiring 
European coordination upstream in the context of international discussions rather than 
the approval of individual projects. 
•	 	Measures to eliminate old and dormant commitments and to improve internal financial 
control and supervision.
Figure 4.1  Development aid, distribution of responsibilities in the Commission ( pre-2011 reform)
Commissioner for External 
Commissioner for Develop- Commissioner Commissioner 
Relations and Neighbour-
ment and Humanitarian Aid for Enlargement for Trade
hood Policy
DG ECHO DG ECHO DG RELEX DG ENLARG DG TRADE
All developing countries (potential) All countries 
All countries ACP + OCT outside DG DEV and DG Accession outside 
ELARG countries the EU
| 132 |
Humani-
Thematic 
Democracy and  
tarian  IPA
programmes
human rights 
aid EDF
DCI 
ENPI 
EDF
Stability 
Nuclear Safety
DCI
IC
EuropeAid
Delegations in partner countries with staff 
International organisations NGOs
from different DGs
4.2  Creation of EuropeAid 
Centrepiece of the institutional reform was the establishment of EuropeAid in January 2001 
as the single body in charge of aid implementation. Its creation aimed to integrate the 
entire operations cycle into one structure – from programme and project identification to 
results measurement – and to harmonise the management of all aid (OECD (2002)). 
EuropeAid became responsible for implementing the full range of the Commission’s 

Aid management reform – focus on Brussels
more integrated, effective and visible EU foreign policy and for improved coherence of an 
increasingly explicitly formulated European foreign and security policy, of which external aid 
is an important element. 
Text Box 4.1 The Lisbon Treaty on international affairs
The Treaty is expected to give the Union a clear voice in international relations and 
to promote European interests and values worldwide, while respecting the 
particular interests of the Member States in foreign affairs matters. The Treaty 
enhances the relatively vague formulations of the Maastricht Treaty on the EU’s 
goals and the CFSP is reformulated as a competence of the Union. Development 
and humanitarian aid remained shared competences. The objectives of the Union’ s 
external policies, from security and development to trade and environment, are 
worded as follows: (i) ‘Union policy in the field of development cooperation shall be 
conducted within the framework of the principles and objectives of the Union’s 
external action’, which includes fostering ‘the sustainable economic, social and 
environmental development of developing countries, with the primary aim of 
eradicating poverty’; (ii) ‘Union development cooperation policy shall have as its 
primary objective the reduction and, in the long term, the eradication of poverty’ and 
(iii) ‘(the) Union shall take account of the objectives of development cooperation in 
| 134 |
the policies that it implements which are likely to affect developing countries’.  
The Treaty introduced several important organizational changes, amongst others in the EU’s 
137 
traditional pillar structure. The intergovernmental pillar of the CFSP, managed by the 
Council Secretariat, and the Community pillar of external policies managed by the European 
Commission were drawn together in the same organisational structure. This is reflected in the 
new position of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy 
who is at the same time Vice-President of the European Commission (in short HRVP) and at 
the apex of ‘a system which can articulate the EU’s policies and positions’ (Avery (2008)). To 
the Netherlands, merging the two functions would benefit the coherence and decisiveness of 
the Union’s external action – something for which it had aspired (KST 116277 (2008)).  The 
Treaty also implied that the EU’s six-month rotating Presidency will have less influence on 
external policy:  the HRVP chairs the Foreign Affairs Council instead of the rotating Presidency 
and represents the Union for matters relating to the CFSP, which is often referred to as the 
138
‘third hat’ of the HRVP (Avery (2008)).
137 
According to this structure, policy areas were formally divided into: community policies (1st pillar), CFSP (2nd 
Pillar) and Justice and Home Affairs (3rd pillar). Egenhofer et al (2011) consider the set-up as ‘a ‘particular 
innovation of the Lisbon Treaty’ while to Missiroli (2010b), ‘(by) streamlining and partially ‘merging’ the 
pre-existing pillars through a personal union at the top, ‘foreign policy’ – such was the reasoning – could even 
become the new driver of European integration, with potential ripple effects in other areas’.
138 
Also the new President of the European Council has a role to play in the Union’s external affairs. The 
Lisbon Treaty is however rather silent on the division of responsibilities between the President and the 
HRVP (Curtin and Dekker (2010)).

Aid management reform – focus on Brussels
Text Box 4.2 Diverging Member State views on the EEAS
Smaller Member States’ opinions (like Austria, Benelux, and the Visegrad countries) 
have made a plea to having ‘consular services included in the responsibilities of the 
EU Delegations, enabling them to close embassies in some cases’ (Furness 
142
(2010)).  They were also ‘wary of the EU’s ‘big three’ (France, Germany and the 
UK) creating and dominating a foreign policymaking apparatus outside Community 
control. The bigger three at the same time found themselves in a balancing act 
between a strong role for EU diplomacy while at the same time maintaining their 
own diplomatic networks and bilateral relations. They have been limiting HRVP 
and EEAS independence by keeping them closely tied to the Council. According to 
Blockmans (2012), they have been warning against ‘competence creep’ and 
opposing cost increases in EU external relations. This cost-consciousness is also 
evident on the side of the Netherlands. 
In March 2010, the HRVP came with a proposal for a Council decision establishing the 
organisation and functioning of the EEAS (see Text Box 4.3).  Consultations were thereafter 
opened with the European Parliament and agreement was reached in June. This was 
| 136 | followed by a Council Decision establishing the organisation and functioning of the EEAS 
and approval in the European Parliament in July 2010. In September 2010, the Council 
finally stated that ‘(the) establishment of the EEAS should be guided by the principle of 
cost-efficiency aiming towards budget neutrality’ and called upon Commission and HRVP 
‘to present budgetary proposals which are in alignment with this objective’ (Council 
(2011a)).
142 
Also a BENELUX non-paper on the EEAS of April 2011 touches upon consular cooperation, suggesting 
that ‘(further) study is advisable of the possible support that the EEAS could provide in consular matters 
within the parameters set by the Treaty and the Council decision establishing the EEAS’. IOB’s 
evaluation Consulaire dienstverlening doorgelicht 2007-2010 of April 2011 makes clear however that 
there is a long way to go: with the exception of European cooperation in case of emergency evacua-
tions, there is hardly any European cooperation in consular services and Member States continue to 
provide these services (visa, travel advice, etc.) individually (IOB (2011a)). In 2012, the Netherlands 
confirmed its plea for increasing the Service’s consular tasks though it was realized that its human 
resources and expertise were still limited and a number of Member States were against an EEAS role in 
this respect (KST 33400-V-2 (2012)). Vooren and Wessel (2012) observe in this respect: ‘Some Member 
States have a strong interest for EU Delegations to develop a capacity for consular support for EU 
citizens, whereas others are clearly opposed to the EU taking such a role, since they see this as a purely 
national competence. What is certain from the perspective of the EEAS is that if the Union wishes to 
pursue such a role for EU delegations abroad, significantly more financial and human resources will 
need to be allocated to the EU diplomatic service’.

Aid management reform – focus on Brussels
established positions (European External Action Service (2011)), an issue is that the target of 
recruiting at least 30% of EEAS staff from the Member States was still far off by April 2011. A 
review of the EEAS is to be presented by the HRVP by mid-2013. As observed by Krätke and 
Sherriff (2012), ‘the challenge will be first to elaborate and propose a politically satisfactory 
scope for the review, which, second has a credible methodology that seizes the opportunity 
for learning and accountability’. 
Establishing the DG for Development and Cooperation
With the establishment of the EEAS, DG RELEX ceased to exist, and the remainder of DGDEV 
was merged with EuropeAid to become the DG for Development and Cooperation (DEVCO). 
Operational since June 2011, DEVCO is headed by the Commissioner for Development 
(Andris Piebalgs). Contrary to the pre-Lisbon past, this Commissioner is responsible for 
formulating development policy for all developing countries and delivering aid throughout 
the world.  After several years of separation going back to the late 1990s, development 
policy-making, policy dialogue at sector level and policy implementation are again united 
in one DG. 
As of January 2013, DEVCO’s organisational structure consists of three policy and thematic 
directorates, five geographic directorates and one support directorate. Dealings with ACP 
| 138 | countries are spread over four geographic departments, i.e. East and Southern Africa and 
ACP coordination, West and Central Africa, Latin America and Caribbean and Asia, Central 
Asia, Middle East/Gulf and the Pacific. The former units on policy coherence for 
development and EU aid effectiveness have been merged. Its Directorate A ‘Development 
Policy’ includes the Joint Evaluation Unit, a unit for policy and coherence and the 
secretariat of the management committees that exist for the various financial instruments.
State of affairs and issues
It is too early judge whether the EEAS has been able to realize what it was set out to do: ‘the 
dust still needs to settle’ (Blockmans (2012)) as was also recognized by the HRVP in her 
report of December 2011 (EEAS (2011)). Nevertheless, twelve EU Member States, including 
146
the Netherlands , expressed their concern about some of the main problems faced by the 
EEAS in their Non-paper on the EEAS of 8 December 2011. Concerns have also been raised in 
academia. The main issues of strategy and aid management are in brief the following.
In its foreign relations, the EU has a ‘plethora of strategies but no strategy’, but more ‘a 
147
canon of basic strategic documents’.  Defining a vision and strategic medium and 
long-term objectives is vital to address the ‘inter-connected challenges of the 21st century: 
146 
Other signatories were Belgium, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, 
Luxembourg, Poland and Sweden.
147 
See on this issue Grimm (2009), Keukeleire et al (2010), Duke and Courtier (2011), Concord (2011), 
Blockmans (2012) and Duke et al (2012). Mackie et al (2012) state in this respect that despite the steps 
towards institutional foreign policy reform, ’ its intent to adopt a comprehensive approach and regional 
strategies has delivered little more than a range of loosely connected and repackaged implementation 
mechanisms’.

Aid management reform – focus on Brussels
(2011)).  Streamlining relations between EEAS and DEVCO at the level of the EU Delegations 
remains an issue as well.
Council and Committee changes
Following the European Council meeting of Seville, the Development Council was 
incorporated into the General Affairs and External Relations Council configuration (dealing 
with foreign affairs, defence policy, foreign trade, development cooperation and 
humanitarian aid). While initially against, by 2003 the Dutch position was that this integration 
151
was an advantage, provided that development topics would be sufficiently visible. In 2009, 
the Council figuration dealing with aid changed once more, with the General Affairs and 
External Relations Council split into a General Affairs and a Foreign Affairs setting.
For many years, an issue has been the functioning of the EU comitology in Brussels – 
including the EDF committee.  Already in 1998, OECD reflected critically on the focus on 
‘project-by-project approval’ and ‘micro-management’ that prevented attention to broader 
policy and results-oriented discussions (OECD (1998)). In 1999, also the Council was in 
favour of ‘an increased role of the committees in strategic and sectoral issues’, which would 
require a re-thinking of the committees’ work on the approval of individual projects 
(Council (1999b)). Two years later the Council was determined ‘to refocus management 
| 140 | committee tasks on the strategic aspects of cooperation’ (Council (2001e)). In 2002, OECD 
suggested that EU institutions in Brussels, including Parliament, the Management 
Committees, and the Council of Ministers, needed to consider how they would ‘provide a 
strategic oversight of the outcomes, rather than trying to set targets for inputs’ (OECD 
(2002)). This tallied with the position of the Netherlands at the time: the Council should not 
get involved in micro-management and Commission working groups and committees were 
to become a platform to discuss the implications of broader policy initiatives or of the 
  
country strategy papers rather than for assessing each project proposal separately.
Commission proposals in 2006 to give the EDF committee a more strategic role were 
therefore met with Dutch approval. 
Not much changed however and in 2007 OECD repeated its earlier recommendations ‘to 
improve and consider streamlining the different levels of oversight they exercise over 
development operations to enable the Commission to further improve its effectiveness and 
performance’ (OECD (2007)). Oversight ‘should be structured so as to be strategic, 
streamlined and supportive of Commission operations’. Again five years later, OECD 
reiterated its position that the oversight from both the Council and the European 
Parliament ‘could be made more strategic and focus more on the expected results, beyond 
controlling inputs and outputs’, since current detailed scrutiny ‘leads to micromanaging the 
programme and hampers its effective delivery in the field (delays, lack of flexibility to 
respond to emerging needs, time-consuming procedures)’ (OECD (2012)).
151 
In October 2012, the Development Ministers of Denmark, Finland, Germany, the Netherlands, Poland 
and Sweden suggested the HRPV to hold the development meetings on a separate day from the 
Foreign Affairs Ministers’ meeting.

Aid management reform – focus on Brussels
The ROM is based on short, on-site assessments that are done by independent experts that 
are externally contracted through framework contracts. Projects and programmes are 
appraised against the usual OECD/DAC criteria of relevance, efficiency, effectiveness, 
potential impact and likely sustainability. For each project, a short report provides an 
overall assessment and recommendations for improvement. The annual costs of the ROM 
are estimated at some EUR 17 million. The system covers some 600 projects per year in ACP 
countries (see Table 4.1). These are on-going projects with a minimum EU contribution of 
about EUR 1 million; for projects funded below this threshold a sample of 10% is assessed. 
The ROM was extended to examine projects after the Commission funding period has ended 
(ex-post ROM) and to cover sector approaches and budget support (Commission (2006j)).
Table 4.1 ROM implementation 2002-2010 in ACP countries
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
No of countries 40 44 n.a 62 68 77 38 n.a n.a
No of projects 262 293 302 369 485 n.a 210 507 671
No of reports 298 325 n.a 365 511 n.a 221 435 n.a
EUR  mln covered 2,911 3,011 3,006 4,109 5,218 5,964 1,848 4,211 4,059
Sources: Commission (2003i), (2004o), (2005q), (2006v), (2007s), (2008t), (2009t), (2010aa) and (2011ac).
| 142 |
While OECD (2012) refers to the potential usefulness of the ROM that should be explored 
better, it also mentions doubts expressed at Delegation level on the usefulness of ROM 
recommendations; similar remarks were made during the country visits. At country level 
‘further efforts could be made to ensure that the analysis and the recommendations 
provided to Delegations is more useful ... in terms of identifying issues that need to be 
addressed to ensure projects are on track to meet their objectives’ (OECD (2012)). In its 
Special Report No 1/2011, the European Court of Auditors (Court of Auditors (2011b)) 
observed first of all that ‘the assessment of quality within the ROM system is necessarily 
dependent on the specific methodology used’ – with the methodology changing in 2009. 
Secondly, the system, which was originally designed to monitor individual projects, has 
limited use for the purpose of measuring the overall performance of the Commission’s aid 
portfolio. It is not a reliable instrument for making comparisons between years and its 
coverage is limited and too much focused on projects and not on budget support for which 
153
there is no ROM methodology. 
153 
According to the Commission ‘the aggregation of ROM data on the portfolio as a whole was added as a 
proxy indicator for an overview of the portfolio‘s performance; however, this is not ROM‘s primary 
purpose.’ Along the same lines, ICAI (2012) observes that ‘the ROM serves multiple purposes which are 
not consistent with each other’ (i.e. from providing a ‘quick overall portfolio assessment to help 
decision-making’ to providing a ‘basis for external accountability’) and that, ‘given that projects are 
selected in different ways, the summarised data are not comparable enough to provide a robust basis 
for overall conclusions’.

Aid management reform – focus on Brussels
Commission, this work will be done jointly by the ACP State(s) and the Community’, 
evaluations are done on behalf of the Commission only, though debriefing sessions are 
154
held with the partner countries’ authorities once the exercise is over. 
Since 1998, evaluation reports are published on the European Commission’s website, 
together with an evaluation summary, a quality assessment of the evaluation by the JEU and 
often a reaction to the recommendations by the services concerned – the so-called fiche 
155
contradictoire. A summary of the findings is included in the Commission’s Annual Report to 
the Council and the European Parliament. This is not the case for the decentralised 
evaluations for which the JEU may provide advice but of which it lacks at present the 
necessary oversight in terms of quality and findings. Table 4.2 gives an overview of the 
number of JEU evaluations conducted between 2000 and 2011 that either cover or include 
ACP countries. 
Table 4.2 Evaluations commissioned by the JEU in the period 2000 – 2011
ACP ACP Thematic Channel Sector Other Total
country regional
2000 5 2 4 1 1 21 34
2001 3 1 3 1 5 13
| 144 |
2002 3 3 3 9
2003 1 1 2 4 8
2004 2 5 5 12
2005 2 1 1 2 6
2006 6 1 1 2 5 15
2007 1 2 2 7 12
2008 1 2 1 3 1 1 9
2009 6 7 13
2010 5 1 1 4 11
2011 3 1 3 5 12
Total 35 9 15 6 20 69 154
154 
This is in line with Council Regulation (EC) No 617/2007 of 14 May 2007 stating that evaluations ‘shall be 
conducted in association with the partner country or region and in coordination with the Member 
States locally represented’.
155 
The ‘fiche contradictoire’, mandatory since November 2001, captures the recommendations made on the 
basis of the evaluation findings and the reaction of the Commission services concerned. An assessment 
conducted in in 2008 (see Hanberger and Gisselberg (2008a), and (2008b)) indicates that the usefulness 
of this management response system has been limited. According to OECD (2012), the Evaluation Unit 
does not have a clear overview of the extent to which their recommendations are accepted and used to 
inform new policies and programmes.

Aid management reform – focus on Brussels
reports, or financing agreements. Neither the ROM reports nor the reports on decentralized 
evaluations are published and only shared between Commission and the partner countries. 
The same is true for the country reviews.
Since 2001, aid reporting has been stepped up. EuropeAid’s ‘Report on the Implementation 
of the European Commission’s External Assistance’ (Commission (2001e)) was the first 
Annual report on EU foreign aid and ‘very much a work in progress’. The Commission has 
continued to prepare similar annual reports until today. The reports provide general 
information on the developments in EU aid policies and aid management, specific events 
during the year, the evolution of the Cotonou Agreement and the different EDFs as well as 
information on type and volume of (planned) support for specific countries, sectors and/or 
themes. Information on results is occasionally provided but (very) limited. On (net) 
outcomes it is virtually absent, apart from the occasional, illustrative highlights on a 
158
particular project or programme. Over the years, the Council has welcomed these annual 
159
reports but has persistently asked additional information and analysis on : (i) results, 
outcomes and impact of Commission aid; (ii) MDG realisation; (iii) cross-cutting issues such 
as human rights, gender, and environment; (iv) follow-up given to the European Consensus 
on Development and Code of Conduct on Division of Labour; and (v) PCD issues.  Questions 
have also been raised as regards ‘the objectivity of the information provided’ – similar 
160
| 146 | remarks have been made on the bi-monthly ACP-EU Courier.  
EuropeAid, DGDEV and DG RELEX have furthermore published their own annual, primarily 
managerial, reports. These are accompanied by financial reports and are the main input for 
the audits of the European Court of Auditors. In addition, annual reports on the 
implementation of operational EDFs are prepared by EuropeAid and published in the 
Official Journal of the European Union as well as on Internet, together with the annual Final 
Accounts of the operational EDFs. 
158 
On reporting, Council Regulation (EC) No 617/2007 of 14 May 2007 stipulates that the Commission ‘shall 
submit to the Council an annual report on the implementation and results and, as far as possible, the 
main outcomes, results and impacts of the assistance’ (Council (2007j)). The report ‘shall assess the 
results of the assistance on the eradication of poverty, using as far as possible specific and measurable 
indicators of its role in meeting the objectives of the ACP-EC Partnership Agreement’. Particular 
attention shall be given to progress made towards achieving the MDGs and implementing the 
principles of coordination, ownership and aid effectiveness ‘and cover the accompanying measures of 
the Economic Partnership Agreements’. 
159 
See Council (2004b), (2005g), (2006r), (2007n) and (2009m).
160 
The EDF budget finances the ACP-EU Courier. From April 2004 to mid-2007, publication of the Courier 
in hard copy was suspended and an Internet version (the so-called ‘eCourier’) was published instead 
(June 2005 - January 2007), after which the paper version was re-launched. Electronic copies can be 
found at http://www.acp-eucourier.info.

Aid management reform – focus on Brussels
Summary of main findings
The management reforms initiated in Brussels in 2000 entailed the establishment of EuropeAid to manage 
the entire aid operations cycle, the introduction of an aid quality control function and strengthening of the 
Commission’s (financial) management and oversight functions. Over the years, both the European Court of 
Auditors and OECD have positively assessed the steps taken in these areas, though the quality of programme 
and project documents has remained an issue. 
The Lisbon Treaty has resulted in a major change of the landscape in Brussels with the nomination of the 
HRVP in December 2009, the formal launch of the EEAS one year later and the establishment of DEVCO 
mid-2011. While this is too recent to give a final opinion on the results accomplished, a series of issues has 
transpired in terms of (a) need for overall strategy, (b) staffing of the EEAS by Member State diplomats, and 
(c) demarcating responsibilities between the EEAS and other DGs with an external mandate. Whether the 
EEAS review programmed for 2013 will address them remains to be seen.
  
Though the reform of comitology and working groups in Brussels has been on the agenda for some time, 
OECD peer reviews make clear that little has changed. There continues to be a focus on micro-management. 
The announcement by the Netherlands that it will use comitology to closely follow (and vote against) 
individual general budget support proposals reduces hopes on reform in the near future.
| 148 |
A Results Oriented Monitoring (ROM) system was introduced in the early years of the new Millennium. It was 
designed to monitor individual interventions – not for providing aggregate information. It has therefore 
limited use for the purpose of measuring the overall performance of the Commission’s aid portfolio. As 
mentioned by both OECD and the European Court of Auditors, there remains a need to supplement the ROM 
through other instruments. 
 
The call for a completely independent external aid evaluation service has not been honoured even though the 
Joint Evaluation Unit is not subordinate to management, operational or policy departments. Member States’ 
stress on improving the evaluation function has not translated into making more resources available. 
Relative to the aid envelope it is to cover, the JEU, while focusing on more strategic evaluations, remains 
relatively small, both in terms of staffing and budget. Major components of the EDF (including e.g. the 
Facilities under the Intra ACP instrument) have not been evaluated. Moreover, the JEU lacks oversight of 
decentralized evaluations done elsewhere in the system. While rigorous impact evaluation is rarely done, the 
JEU has played an important role in developing methods for the evaluation of general budget support. 
Commission aid-related information flows have improved over the years. Most of the information concerns 
policies, plans, regulations, and financial commitments, with insufficient data on spending, results and (net) 
outcomes. This also concerns the annual reports on the European Community’s development and external 
assistance policies and their implementation. While public information overall has improved, the changes in 
public information at country level have been variable and more limited. 

5
Aid management at  
Delegation level

Aid management at Delegation level
5.2  The current state of affairs
With the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty, the Commission’s Delegations have become 
Union Delegations and are part of the EEAS structure: they are the Union’s ‘diplomatic 
antennas’ (Austermann (2012)). The big difference is that they now have the mandate to 
represent the European Union in its entirety – not solely the Commission. In addition to 
their earlier (development) work, they deal with the Common Foreign and Security Policy 
and the European Security and Defence Policy as well. EU Delegations now include a 
political section (EEAS staff ) and an operations section (Commission staff ) and are headed 
164
by an EEAS Head of Delegation. Their potential role is threefold : (i) provide Brussels with 
information and analysis of developments on the ground, contacts with local actors and a 
reinforced outreach; (ii) coordinate the work of Member States’ embassies and (iii) 
‘represent an authoritative interlocutor to third country governments and societies in all 
areas of cooperation, with positive consequences on the EU’s image abroad’. However, this 
requires, in addition to getting the necessary a staff, a change in the cooperation between 
Brussels and Delegations and regulating working relations between EU Delegations and the 
165
Embassies of the EU Presidency. 
Following the devolution, the EDF is managed under different management models as 
| 152 | described above in chapter 1. 
Under decentralized management, Delegations, together with the national authorities, are 
responsible for the management of the entire cycle of EU development aid, including 
contracting and payments and monitoring and evaluation of individual aid interventions. 
The approval of financing proposals (i.e. global commitments of funds) remains done in 
Brussels, where the Commission has to get approval from the EDF Committee. 
While Delegations have the authority to decide on disbursements within the budget 
authorized, they have to seek Brussels’ approval for every new activity, irrespective of 
volume. They also have a limited role in decision making regarding thematic and regional 
funds, with some programmes still designed in Brussels (HTSPE (2008) and OECD (2012)). 
OECD highlighted therefore the need to continue the devolution process, which was to ‘be 
complemented by more strategic empowerment in such areas as project approval and 
results reporting’ (OECD (2009)). While Delegations are responsible for preparing financing 
proposals and evaluating conditions for disbursements of budget support, Brussels – as the 
‘sole authorising officer’ – remains responsible for the approval of payments. According to 
a standard phrase in financing agreements related to budget support: ‘The programme shall 
be implemented by the Commission by centralised management’. 
164 
See Duke and Courtier (2011), Mackie (2010) and Blockmans (2012).
165 
There is also a need to address (i) the mistrust that may prevail between the delegations and the 
Embassies of the Member States (Duke et al (2012)) plus (ii) what are referred, to as inter-institutional 
rivalries which have led ‘to insecurities about the lines of reporting and the accountability of the EU 
Delegations vis-à-vis Brussels’ (Austermann (2012)).

Aid management at Delegation level
Despite the initiatives taken during the devolution years in terms of staffing, a series of issues 
remain:
•	 	In 2010, EuropeAid reported on a worsening human resources situation, with ‘(staffing) levels at 
the beginning of 2010 .. down to an all-time low of four persons per EUR 10 million of aid 
167
funding’. This was attributed to the fact that since 2007 the Commission’s aid departments 
have been operating within a ‘zero growth environment for Commission posts until 2013’ and a 
168
‘continuing budget freeze on non-permanent staff financed from operational programmes’. 
To make up for this situation, a large proportion of Commission staff is temporary, with a 
limited term, non-renewable contract that expires after three years. By the end of 2010, this 
concerned 42% of EuropeAid’s staff in Brussels and 77% of Delegation staff (Commission 
(2011r)). This high share contributes to a high turnover rate, with around a third of the 
169
temporary staff leaving EuropeAid in 2009. Moreover, a high vacancy rate was observed of 
170
contract staff in Delegations , which by the end of 2009 was some 16% overall and over 20% in 
fragile states (Commission (2009m) and OECD (2012)).
•	 	While the European Court of Auditors and OECD repeatedly asked for the necessary expertise 
171
in areas of policy dialogue, public financial management, health and education , the 
recruitment process has resulted in ‘the employment of specialists who can be used 
throughout the Commission civil service.’ This is in line with the position of the Member 
| 154 | States which have been opposed to ‘increasing the number of staff in development 
operations, on the grounds that the Commission could just move staff in from other, 
172
non-developmental, functions’ (OECD (2002). OECD reiterated that the Commission 
needed ‘to ensure it has people with specific expertise in the right places, i.e. where that 
expertise can be applied and drawn on’ (OECD (2012)). 
•	 	With the changes that have come with the Lisbon Treaty, responsibilities of the EU 
Delegations have increased. This increase is only partly dealt with by the EEAS political 
advisors that have been nominated. Van Seters and Klavert (2011) refer in this respect to a 
strengthening of political sections in some countries at the expense of operations sections 
tasked with aid management.
167 
In 2004, this ratio was 4.8 staff to manage EUR 10 million compared with a pre-reform of 3.1 staff per EUR 
10 million, in 2005 more than 5 staff per EUR 10million while in 2006 this was 4.5 staff per EUR 10 million 
(Commission (2004n), (2005b), (2006n) and (2006j)). 
168 
Commission (2010e) and (2011r) and Court of Auditors (2011b). The staffing issue is clearly linked to the 
broader issue of Commission aid management costs. According to the UK House of Commons (2012), the 
share of these costs of total aid commitments/disbursements was 5.9% in 2008, 5.3% in 2009 and 5.4% in 
2010. These shares are above the admin costs of DFID but below those of the World Bank/IDA. The House 
concluded that ‘(although) the European Commission has higher administration costs for development 
than DFID, it is difficult compare like for like. The Commission does far more direct work which requires a 
greater level of administration. We urge, however, the Government to continue to stress the need for value 
for money’ (UK House of Commons (2012)).
169 
Commission (2010u) and (2009m).
170 
For example Commission (2007e) and (2010u). 
171 
OECD (2012) and Court of Auditors (2010b). 
172 
In 2012, OECD observed along the same lines that ‘Member States also do not see development specific 
knowledge as a comparative advantage of the EU institutions in headquarters and the field. This affects the 
EU institutions’ capacity in formulating polices and strategies for specific areas and in implementation’ 
(OECD (2012)). See also Frederiksen (2004).  

Aid management at Delegation level
programmes, including EDF, while the number of instruments had been reduced earlier on. 
In addition, manuals, guidelines, practical guides, orientation papers, and working tools 
175
were developed. Nevertheless, until today calls have been made by the European 
176
Parliament and the Council for further improvement, simplification, and streamlining. 
OECD’s peer review of 2012 basically repeats its observations of the review conducted five 
years earlier that despite the reforms, partners and operational staff agree that procedures 
are still cumbersome, which slows down implementation and puts a strain on partners with 
limited capacity, including NGOs (OECD (2012)).
While the Court of Auditors, has seen improvement in compliance with EU procedures, 
Commission evaluation reports and the country case studies confirm the main problems 
referred to above, though opinions differ at times. Particular reference is in this respect 
made to:
•	 	Insufficient information on the Commission’s procedures and a lack of institutional 
capacity to handle them, causing delays in financing decisions and disbursements. In some 
cases, the lack of institutional capacity forced Delegations and NAOs into an ‘administrative, 
accounting and trouble-shooting role’, away from their core technical role.
•	 	Commission procedures were found to be too inflexible and rigidly applied, affecting 
| 156 | road construction in Uganda and the EU supported Ubudehe programme and the 
Decentralized Programme for Rural Poverty Reduction in Rwanda. Possibilities for 
177
flexibility and adjustment to the local context were limited.
•	 T	 endering and procurement procedures were seen as an important cause for the 
frequently reported lapse of time between project and programme design and 
175 
Commission (2005m) refers to ‘one single set of financial and administrative procedures for the full EDF 
cooperation and greater convergence with the budget regulation has already resulted in a rationalisa-
tion of procedures, time reduction in internal processing of financing proposals and the introduction of 
the ‘date+3 years’ rule, ensuring that individual financial commitments should be made before the end 
of the 3rd year after approval to avoid structural delays build up without corrective action’. 
176 
See European Parliament (2005) and Council (2011e). HTSPE (2008) refers in this respect to over 800 
pages of EU regulations, well above other donors. While other donors, had streamlined their 
procedures, this had not been the case for EuropeAid, and EU procedures remained a clear weakness in 
the current implementation process.
177 
According to HTSEP (2008), this is caused by the fact that the Commission is bound to submit detailed 
dossiers – Action Fiches –for scrutiny by the Management Committees. Once approved at this level, it is 
very difficult to make changes and may require full resubmission of the whole set. Action Fiches which 
are not ready by the deadline for submission of the Annual Action Plan will have to wait for the next 
fiscal year or request a special derogation process’. The UK Multilateral aid review refers to ‘limited 
flexibility to re-programme funds away from poorly performing projects, or to respond rapidly to 
changing needs, and continued complaints of cumbersome procedures’. On a more positive note, 
Gavas (2012) refers to the flexibility of providing aid to the newly independent state of South Sudan. 
Though its ratification of the Cotonou Agreement (and henceforth eligibility for EDF support) was not 
expected until 2012, ‘the EU proposed that an additional fund of €200 million (South Sudan had already 
been allocated €285 million of ‘de-committed’ funds from the 9th and previous rounds of the EDF) be 
created from ‘de-committed’ EDF money for programming in South Sudan alone, enabling rapid 
disbursement’.

Aid management at Delegation level
Data on EDF show that under expenditure continued during the early years of the new 
Millennium. The EDFs had become a never ending story: in 2003 the 6th EDF was in its 17th 
year of implementation, the 7th EDF in its 12th year and the 8th EDF, which was in its 5th 
179
year, had been committed at a rate of 85 % but only disbursed at a rate of 38 %. Excluding 
EUR 350 million contributed to the HIPC initiative and structural adjustment funding, 
180
implementation of the EDFs was ‘still slow’ (Court of Auditors (2004)). The situation was 
different by 2011 when the Court observed that the speed of delivery has improved  – in 
terms of both committing an increased amount of funds and spending this additional 
funding sufficiently quickly to avoid the build-up of a backlog of unspent funds (Court of 
Auditors (2011b)). The amount of development aid committed in 2009 was 42% higher than 
in 2004, the amount contracted in 2009 increased by 45% compared with 2004 and 
disbursements rose by 30% over the same period. This has led the Commission to conclude 
‘that the efforts made in recent years to speed up programme implementation have borne 
fruit’ (Court of Auditors (2009a)). 
According to the Court, devolution has facilitated this speeding up by: (i) having more 
operational staff in Delegations, able to prevent and solve procedural issues more quickly; 
(ii) having finance and contracts staff at Delegations, speeding up the resolve of financial 
management issues; (iii) measures taken to streamline and standardise procedures and (iv) 
| 158 | increased use of the budget support instrument. At the same time, the Court considered 
that ‘budget execution indicators overstate the speed of actual aid implementation and 
insufficient use is made of other indicators to monitor the time required for aid 
implementation. This is a particularly important issue for some of the Commission’s aid 
modalities which involve funds being paid into intermediate accounts before final 
181
utilisation’.
In January 2001, EuropeAid embarked furthermore on an action plan to reduce the number 
of dormant commitments – the so-called Reste à Liquider (RAL). These RAL were a ‘serious 
problem’ (Grimm (2004)) since earlier on the overall financing period of EDFs used to be 
open-ended and lasted until the last money was paid. This changed as of 2003, when the 
Commission introduced the so-called the N+3 rule under the 9th EDF financial regulations 
(obligation to contract funds within the 3 years following the year of the global 
commitment of funds) and following the introduction of the sunset clause, which implies 
that de-committed funds cannot be recommitted (Gavas (2012)). 
179 
See Court of Auditors (2001b), (2002) and (2004).
180 
Structural causes of low disbursement identified at the time were (i) a still incomplete reform of EU aid 
management;  (ii) partial or complete suspension of aid to countries following the ‘application of the 
principle of good governance’; (iii) the low absorption capacity of a large number of the ACP states’ 
administrations as well as the weakness of these administrations and (iv) over-diversification and 
inefficiencies resulting from a large number of different budget lines and instruments, many of which 
required their own legal basis and regulations, and the proliferation of cumbersome procedures for 
contracting and payments.
181 
The Commission did not agree to this position and considered these indicators, in conjunction with 
regular monitoring and reporting, a useful and valuable tool (Court of Auditors (2011b)).

6
Financial matters

Financial matters
realised, supplies or services provided and compliance with contracts were not always 
185
reliably carried out.  
From 2003 onwards, the Court has noticed the steps made to improve internal control and 
by 2007 it observed that ‘many of the issues raised in its report are being addressed by the 
Commission (Court of Auditors (2007)). By 2010, the Court’s opinion was that EuropeAid’s 
control environment was effective at the level of both Delegations and central services’ and 
that the Commission’s Internal Control Standards were ‘largely implemented’ (Court of 
186
Auditors (2011a)). Main changes noted by the Court over the years were : 
•	 	The introduction of a ‘comprehensive control strategy’ and the implementation of an 
‘Action Plan for a strengthened EuropeAid management and control pyramid’ from 2009 
onwards. 
•	 The establishment of clear	 , harmonised financial procedures and guidance manuals, 
such as a Financial Management Toolkit (2010) and training of financial and operational 
sections of the Delegations.
•	 	Improvements in the Commission’s operational and financial risk management, both in 
Brussels and the Delegations. 
•	 	The introduction of mandatory audit terms of reference (2007) and of a common 
| 162 | methodology on the set-up, implementation and follow-up of annual audit plans and 
improvement of the management of the external audits. 
•	 	Introduction of a standardized system of External Aid Management Reports in 2004 that 
by 2011 ’provided relevant and reliable information on the ‘implementation, payments 
and external audits relating to the largest projects’. 
•	 Commission initiatives to strengthen the control functions of the N	 AO administrations 
and to support organisations implementing EDF projects. However, results were variable, 
mainly due to a lack of involvement by the ACP States. As a consequence, many 
Delegations could place only limited reliance on the controls performed by the NAO 
187
administrations, resulting in a heavier workload’.
6.2  Internal financial management and reporting
In accordance with the respective Financial Regulations for the different EDFs, the 
Commission, which is responsible for ensuring the legality and regularity of the underlying 
transactions, has been preparing annual financial statements, one for each EDF. These are 
not consolidated with the financial statements of the EIB which manages the Investment 
185 
Court of Auditors (2002), (2003) and (2004).
186 
Court of Auditors (2004), (2006), (2007), (2008), (2009a), (2010) and (2011a).
187 
Court of Auditors (2007). This prompted the Court in 2008 and 2009 to draw attention to the issue of 
Delegation staffing as mentioned above.

Financial matters
several financing decisions under the Intra-ACP programme; (ii) delays in finalising the 10th 
EDF programming documents for the OCTs and (iii) the 10th EDF Mid-Term Review of the 
193
Country Strategy Papers (Court of Auditors (2011a).
6.3  Ensuring external financial scrutiny
Audits by the European Court of Auditors
Each year, the European Court of Auditors audits all areas of EDF activities, the annual 
194
accounts themselves as well as the overall presentation of the financial statements. Based 
on its audit, the Court produces an annual report and an opinion on the reliability of the 
accounts and the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions. This report is 
published in the Official Journal of the European Union and is available on the Court’s 
website. For the period 2000-2010, the Court’s reports indicate in summary the following. 
With certain reservations, the Court concluded for some years that the transactions 
th th th
underlying the financial statements of the 6 , 7 and 8 EDFs’ were ‘taken as a whole, legal 
195
and regular’. Also in 2010 the Court concluded that in 2009 the revenue, commitments 
and payments underlying the accounts of operational EDFs ‘were in all material respects 
legal and regular’ (Court of Auditors (2010)). Its position was different in 2008, 2009 and 
| 164 | 2011, when the Court differentiated its opinion between revenue and commitments, which 
were considered legal and regular ‘in all material respects’, and payments – which were 
196
‘materially affected by error’.  
Irregularities have been observed as regards commitments and payments made in the ACP 
countries under the responsibility of the national or regional authorising officers. However, 
193 
Along the same lines, the Dutch Parliament was informed in 2012 that expenditures were lower than 
forecast for amongst others the following reasons: (i) application of appropriate measures under Article 
96 of the Cotonou Agreement in the case of Zimbabwe, Guinea Bissau, Madagascar, Fiji and Niger in 
2012; (ii) conditions related to general budget support were not or insufficiently fulfilled as was the case 
for e.g. Burundi, Namibia and Uganda; (iii) the annulment of major infrastructure tenders (e.g. in the 
case of the African Union, DRC and Zambia) (KST 33480-V-3 (2012)). See also Gavas (2012), referring also 
to a slowdown in expenditure as a result of the re-orientation of the EU’s aid programme as part of the 
EU Agenda for Change and the new stricter guidelines for budget support eligibility
194 
An audit involves: (i) performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and 
disclosures in the final consolidated accounts and the legality and regularity of the underlying 
transactions; (ii) evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies used and reasonableness of 
accounting estimates made and (iii) evaluating the overall presentation of the final consolidated 
accounts and the annual activity reports. An audit is based on: (i) an audit of a sample of transactions, 
coupled, where necessary, with on- the-spot visits of implementing organisations and final beneficiar -
ies; (ii) an assessment of the effectiveness of supervisory and control systems at EuropeAid’s central 
services and Delegations and (iii) a review of Commission management representations, including an 
assessment of EuropeAid’s Annual Activity Report.
195 
See for example Court of Auditors (2001b), (2005b), (2006) and (2007). 
196 
Court of Auditors (2008), (2009a) and (2011a).

Financial matters
Dealing with (allegations of ) fraud
The European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) may investigate allegations of fraud and 
200
irregularities with respect to external action, including development aid. According to 
OLAF, such fraud and irregularities may range from ineligibility of expenditure financed, 
over-invoicing, market-sharing agreements, conflicts of interest, to favouritism, undue 
influence on members of committees that are responsible for evaluating the quality of 
offers, embezzlement and corruption. OLAF conducts its own investigations and supports 
legal authorities in both the EU member states and partner countries in dealing with 
allegations of fraud and irregularities. It collaborates with national law enforcement 
201
authorities, Commission departments, other donors and NGOs. 
From the year 2002-2003 onwards, ‘OLAF’s investigation policy has moved increasingly 
towards confronting fraud and corruption in those areas of expenditure which are directly 
202
managed by the Commission’ , i.e. towards ‘areas where Member States exercise no 
specific responsibility and OLAF is the principal actor, or even the only administrative 
203
authority engaged in the fight against fraud’. This trend in OLAF’s case load has continued 
to date and has implied an increased share of OLAF investigations related to external aid:  
investigations for which Member States are responsible are increasing taken care of by the 
same Member States and no longer appear in the statistics on OLAF investigations.
| 166 |
Data on the number of fraud cases initiated by OLAF in external aid – its reports do not 
204
specify EDF – are shown in Figure 6.1. According to the Commission, OLAF opened 66 
investigations in 2009 (compared with 83 in 2008) and by the end of 2009, 20 had been 
closed by OLAF as non-cases, 36 were still under assessment and 9 cases were in active 
investigation (Commission (2010u)). OLAF opened 61 new investigations in 2010 and by the 
end of that year, 20 had been closed as non-cases and 41 were under assessment or active 
investigation (Commission (2011r)). It is worth noting that organisations and institutions 
from EU member states (as well as candidate countries) were involved in a considerable 
number of OLAF’s external aid investigations: 66 in 2004, 58 in 2007 and 33 in 2010.  
200 
With respect to the EDF, OLAF’s role is for example described in Article 14 of the Financial Regulation of 
th
27 March 2003 applicable to the 9 European Development Fund. The Regulation stipulates further-
more that ‘(each) grant agreement shall provide expressly for the Commission, OLAF and the Court of 
Auditors to exercise their powers of control, on documents and on the spot, over all contractors and 
subcontractors who have received financial assistance from EDF resources’.
201 
 See for example Commission (2001c), (2003e) and (2006s).
202 
Commission (2003e) and (2007p).
203 
Commission (2004l) and (2005c).
204 
In Open Europe’s Briefing Note of 9 November 2008 on 100 examples of EU fraud and waste, reference 
is made to one fraud case in development aid (which concerned a Brussels based institution) while no 
case of waste is mentioned. 

Financial matters
Summary of main findings
Internal control and supervision, financial management and control have been strengthened and 
improvements in financial management have been in line with recommendations made by the European 
Court of Auditors. Financial management and supervision at delegation level have become increasingly 
robust as well. Irrespectively, further improvements are needed, especially as regard (a) the control of the 
eligibility of expenditure at country level, and (b) better compliance with established procedures (keeping in 
mind that non-compliance with procedures does not necessarily imply that funds are disappearing or 
misused). 
The Court’s judgement on the performance of the Commission in ensuring financial scrutiny and in dealing 
with financial management, risk management and financial planning and reporting has improved steadily 
over the years. By 2011 it concluded that EuropeAid’s annual reports gave a fair picture of the implementation 
and results of the supervisory and control systems put in place. Auditing at country level has improved as well, 
though irregularities, primarily of a procedural character, and with variable or negligible financial impact, 
continue to be observed.
Improvements in financial management and planning have contributed to a reduction of under-expenditure. 
That financial planning targets are not reached in recent years is primarily due to the following reasons: (a) 
| 168 | the non-payment of budget support tranches because partner countries did not meet their obligations, (b) 
delays in infrastructure works, (c) delays in programming or approval of financing decisions or (d) the 
suspension of aid in relation to appropriate measures following Article 96 consultations. 
The European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) investigates potential aid related fraud cases. With OLAF focusing on 
fraud cases that are not dealt with by the Member States, the finding that in 2007 the share of aid related 
cases was below the share of external relations of the Commission’s overall budget is positive. Not all cases 
have merited investigation and in both 2009 and 2010 about a third of the cases brought to its attention were 
closed as non-case. Moreover, a considerable share of cases relate to institutions based in Europe. If and when 
appropriate, cases are brought to legal procedures and the Commission initiates action to retrieve misused 
funds. It is relatively successful in this respect.

Part III
EDF implementation and results

7
EDF’s national programmes

EDF’s national programmes
Annex IV  (2000) Annex IV (2010)
The preparation and develop- The preparation and development of country strategy papers 
ment of a Country Support ..based on their own medium development objectives and strategies, and 
Strategy based on the country’s taking into account the principles of joint programming and division of 
own medium-term develop- labour among donors, which shall, to the extent possible a partner 
ment objectives and strategies. country led process.
A clear indication from the A clear indication from the Community of the indicative 
Community of the indicative programmable financial allocation from which the country … 
programmable financial may benefit during the period covered by the multi-annual financial 
allocation from which the framework of cooperation under this Agreement as well as any other 
country may benefit during the relevant information, including a possible reserve for unforeseen needs.
five-year period as well as any 
other relevant information.
The preparation and adoption The preparation and adoption of an indicative programme for 
of an indicative programme for implementing the (strategy paper), taking into account commit-
implementing the Country ments of other donors, and in particular from the EU Member States.
Support Strategy.
Annex IV states furthermore that resource allocation shall be based on ‘standard, objective 
and transparent needs and performance criteria’. While an aid allocation model was also in 
th
| 174 | place for the 9 EDF, a more elaborate version was developed for its successor. Main changes 
were a stronger focus on social and poverty indicators, and more attention for 
standardization, objectivity and transparency in the allocation criteria. At the same time, 
the allocation was no longer an entitlement and could be reduced or increased following 
208
the mid-term and end-of-term reviews of the country strategy. This was in line with earlier 
Dutch desires to do away with the entitlement culture that had developed over the years.
In allocating resources for the partner countries, differentiation, which is bon-ton in 
current EU aid policies, was thus already introduced for the EDF. A two-step approach was 
introduced:
•	 	An initial allocation based on a statistical model which develops the needs and 
performance criteria (see Text Box 7.1), based on data published by recognised 
international institutions and financial performance data extracted from the 
Commission’s accounting system. 
•	 	A possible additional incentive tranche for the country programme as a whole, 
irrespective of whether general budget support is provided, that is based on more 
qualitative criteria concerning democratic governance which cannot easily be fed into a 
quantitative model. 
208 
At the same time the Financial Regulation of 2003 stipulates that ‘(any) resources transferred to the 9th 
EDF that were previously allocated to the indicative programme of an ACP State or an ACP region 
before the entry into force of the Financial Protocol set out in Annex I to the ACP-EC Agreement shall 
remain allocated to that State or region’ (Article 130)

EDF’s national programmes
programmes, to be agreed upon with the ACP countries concerned, which, in turn, 
210
constitute the basis for annual indicative programmes. 
Looking at its leading principles, the approach introduced responds to the need for reform 
of the programming cycle that was identified at the start of new Millennium. More 
211
specifically, it appears to have dealt, at least on paper, with the following Dutch concerns : 
(i) the importance of ownership; (ii) CSPs ought to be linked with PRSPs; (iii) the 
importance of donor coordination; and (iv) recognition of the role of non-state actors, 
including civil society. The question is: was it put into practice?
7.2  Implementing the programming principles
Programming process
A first issue is whether in practice the process of country programming has been in line with 
the above principles. Menocal (2008) concludes that this process ‘is of varying quality and 
depth’ and refers to the ‘critical challenge’ of turning the concept of country ownership into 
reality. Two main issues are identified: (i) insufficient strength, effectiveness and, at times, 
weak governance of government institutions; and (ii) little negotiation capacity of the 
| 176 | partner government, which limited effective participation in the programming process. 
A similar variety can be found when looking at the at the four case study countries. In 
Burkina Faso, the CSP is based on a joint country assessment conducted by staff from the 
Ministries of Finance and Budget and Economy and Development, the EU Delegations, EU 
Member States as well as Canada and Switzerland. There had been some involvement of 
non-state actors and local authorities as well. Still, ownership of policies and concrete 
actions varied from one sector to another and was bigger at the central level. On the issue of 
ownership, interviews in Ethiopia confirmed the pivotal role of the NAO while the 
involvement of non-state actors was considerably less:  their views had only a marginal 
influence on the design of the country programme. Information from Rwanda indicates 
that preparation of CSPs was done in consultation with the NAO, other Government 
agencies, non-state actors, civil society organisations and private sector representatives. 
Various evaluations and Paris Declaration Monitoring reports conclude that Government 
ownership of development policies in Rwanda is strong. Interviews point at the same time 
at a low level of civil society involvement; a strong and centralised Government is one 
210 
These programmes are to include: (a) the priority areas selected for Community financing; (b) overall 
objectives, the targeted beneficiaries, the general policy commitments and the expected impact 
(together with the necessary qualitative and quantitative performance indicators and timetable for 
implementation); (c) the indicative financial allocations; (d) per priority area, and, where applicable  
general budget support, specific objectives and sectoral policy commitments and the most appropriate 
measures and operations for attaining these objectives and targets; and (e) the type of non-State actors 
eligible for funding and, where possible, the resources to be allocated and the type of activities to be 
supported.  
211 
See for example KST 35589 (1999), KST 42623 (1999), KST 47517 (2000), KST 63938 (2002) and KST 
66885 (2003). 

EDF’s national programmes
Country CSP related strategies and policies
Burkina Faso Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper of 2000 and updated in 2004 with its four 
strategic pillars of accelerating equity based growth, access of the poor to basic 
social services, expanding employment and income generating opportunities for 
the poor and good governance. The World Bank’s important role in drafting these 
strategies, especially the most recent Strategy for Accelerated Growth and 
Sustainable Development, has however prompted some donors to question their 
ownership. This position is reinforced by the existence of a document parallel to 
this Strategy, the Programme Présidentiel. 
Ethiopia A series of Government policy documents focusing on sustainable development 
and poverty reduction, including the Agricultural-Development-Led Industrializa-
tion strategy of the 1990s, the interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (2000), 
the Sustainable Development and Poverty Reduction Programme, Poverty 
Reduction Strategy and the Protection of Basic Services Programme of 2002. 
There is also a link with the Plan for Accelerated and Sustainable Development to 
End Poverty for 2005-2010 that is accompanied by long-term Sector Develop-
ment Programmes in e.g. education, health and roads. 
Rwanda Several documents, including Vision 2020 (2000), the PRSP for 2002-2006, and 
the Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy for 2008 - 2012 with 
its three inter-related programmes of Sustainable Growth for Jobs and Exports, 
Vision 2020 Umurenge VUP and Governance. Another important policy has been 
the Government’s Aid Policy of 2006 that sets out how the Government wishes to 
| 178 |
see the country’s aid architecture develop.  
Uganda Poverty Eradication Action Plans, in place since 1997 (promoting pro-poor 
growth with better access to basic services, improved connectivity, agricultural 
reforms and livelihoods, and by fostering national reconciliation and justice) and 
the National Development Plan. 
Coordination with Member States (and beyond)
Collaboration and cooperation between Commission and Member States has been stressed 
for decades. The question is now: how has this translated into practice? The main 
conclusion that can be drawn in this respect is that the landscape is, again, very diverse, in 
line with what was reported by OECD in 2011. In general however, ensuring coordination 
213
remains an uphill task (Barder et al 2010) and progress is slow: everybody wants to 
coordinate but no one wants to be coordinated’ (ODI (2012)). The issue was also recognised 
by the Commission observing in 2012 that though ‘(in) general, .. the implementation of 
in-country division of labour principles by the EU and its Member States is progressing…
progress in sector concentration has been very limited’ (Commission (2012d)). On the Dutch 
side it has been acknowledged that joint programming is not an easy or fast process: 
Member States have their own priorities, working methods and budget cycles which are 
213 
See also for example KST 74461 (2004), Renzio (2005), (Commission (2005m), (2010z), (2011g) and 
(2011w), OECD (2011) and ODI (2012). Likewise, ECDPM (2012) refers to division of labour as ‘a rather 
difficult exercise so far’. ‘The overall weakness of the Code of Conduct of 2007 has been its voluntary, 
‘self-policing’ nature. In the end, the road towards a better division of labour among EU donors is a 
political undertaking and, up to now, political commitment through the (Code of Conduct (IOB)) was 
shown to be insufficient to ensure the actions agreed were undertaken. In the end, it remains a 
country’s sovereign decision whether or not to exit or enter a certain sector or country’. 

EDF’s national programmes
coordination forums, in which both the Commission and the Member States (and others) 
participate, makes the creation of solely European aid coordination a questionable goal. 
Findings from the four country case studies indicate the following. In Burkina Faso, donor 
coordination hovered around the General Framework for Budget Support. The Delegation 
has been a key player in the ‘Comité de gestion de l’Aide Budgétaire’ that also includes 
representatives from the Government, Denmark, France, Germany, the Netherlands, 
Sweden, Switzerland, the African Development Bank and the World Bank. In Ethiopia, EU 
Delegation, Member States, other donors and Government have been meeting in an 
elaborate system of, partly overlapping, consultation mechanisms:  the High Level Forum, 
the Development Assistance Group and Technical Working Groups. They primarily served 
information sharing, in some cases the preparation of a joint policy or political statement, 
but rarely did they contribute to coordination and common approaches at the operational 
level prompting the country evaluation of 2004 to question the effectiveness of the 
arrangements in place. This changed following the introduction of the World Bank led, 
multi-donor Protection of Basic Services Programme in 2005, which is considered a 
well-functioning donor coordination mechanism, reinforced by strong Government 
participation and co-financed by the EU. Assessments within the frame of monitoring of the 
Paris Declaration in 2006 and 2008 moreover point at some improvements in terms of joint 
| 180 | donor missions and a more substantial increase in joint technical cooperation. In Rwanda, 
Sweden and the Netherlands decided to refrain from general budget support.  France on the 
other hand was less opposed and more ready to accept the ‘risks’ of budget support while 
Germany, the UK and the Commission found themselves somewhere in between. In Uganda, 
both EU Delegation and Member States have been supporting general budget support until 
recently. This has provided an opportunity to enhance information exchange and strategic 
consultation and to come to an agreement to e.g. streamline reporting requirements. 
Role of EU Delegations
Across the board, EU Delegations have indeed played a role in supporting and promoting 
donor coordination. They are perceived to be a committed player in this domain (e.g. in 
relation to political issues and general budget support). The leading role of the Delegation 
depends foremost on the Head of Delegation. This confirms Renzio (2005) observation that 
personalities are a fundamental factor in the success or failure of harmonisation efforts, 
216
especially at country level.
 Though evaluations find that the lead function of Delegations 
is appreciated, it is not always easily accepted by the Member States (nor pushed by the 
Delegation (e.g. in Uganda)). At times, doubts are expressed on the added value of the 
Delegation in terms of coordination or dialogue with the Government, especially when 
political views differ among Commission and Member States (e.g. on human rights, sector 
policies, and the appropriateness of interventions or an instrument like general budget 
support). Staff limitations and staff rotation, complex EU procedures and the limited scope 
216 
See also ICAI (2012), observing that ‘(the) effectiveness of donor co-ordination forums depends heavily 
on the personalities, experience and commitment of staff leading the groups and their government 
counterparts’. 

EDF’s national programmes
219
Key factors that explain recent aid coordination practices at country are the following. 
Commission and Member States have different views on aid priorities – both in terms of 
geographical orientation and aid topics, and more generally, on the relationship between 
national (and EU) foreign policy and development aid as an instrument therein. As observed 
by OECD (2012), reality is that Member States value their bilateral relationships, the 
autonomy of their programmes and are concerned about ensuring the visibility of their 
support both for recipients and for their domestic audiences. Nearly all Member States, 
influenced by national parliaments and ‘public opinion’, want to maintain their own 
priority themes in aid, as well as their own country preferences, programming cycle, views 
on specific aid modalities (especially budget support), procedures etc.  This is also the case 
220
for the Netherlands. In practice, there are furthermore diverging and changing views of 
Commission and individual Member States on what constitutes ‘complementarity’ – i.e. the 
debate on (i) whether the Commission is just another European donor or whether it (also or 
only) has a coordinating role to play and (ii) which sectors Commission and Member States 
221
are supposed to deal with. There are finally different (and changing) degrees of 
decentralisation of aid management among the EU Member States, impacting on the 
functionality of coordination mechanisms ‘in the field’. 
New pilots, supported by the Netherlands, were recently initiated in Ethiopia, Ghana and 
222
| 182 | Rwanda for joint programming, involving Commission, EEAS and Member States. 
However, it is too early to come to a judgment. 
Cooperation and coordination at Commission level
The Cotonou Agreement specifically states that in the preparation of country programmes 
consideration is to be given to ‘other possible Community resources’ (presently these 
219 
See inter alia Grimm (2008), Grimm et al (2009), WRR (2010) and Barder et al (2010). 
220 
The Commission observed in this respect in 2011 that ‘reprogramming also continues to be the result of 
unilateral portfolio decisions at donor headquarters’, with donors reluctant to leave ‘attractive sectors’ 
(Commission (2011e)).
221 
In 2007, OECD recommended that Commission and Member States were to ‘further clarify their 
respective operational roles and ensure strategic use of comparative advantages to manage and deliver 
European development co-operation in country, and across countries and sectors’ (OECD (2007)). The 
Commission was ‘encouraged to work with the Member States to differentiate better their respective 
roles in countries and to prioritise the sectors it targets for assistance, ensuring that it does not spread 
itself too thinly as a donor agency’ and to agree ‘on the details and implementing the most appropriate 
division of labour’. According to WRR (2010), ‘(combining) the role of coordinator of Member States’ 
policy with being the 28th donor is not workable and leads to much friction with other donors in 
recipient countries. Focus on its coordinating role could be combined with a concentration on the 
themes and areas in which the EU clearly has added value, and which European citizens consider 
legitimate issues for the EU’. According to the same source, ‘(in) practice, rather than being an umbrella 
organization or a body that pursues a coherent policy, the EU has become much more an additional 
donor, contributing to the further fragmentation of aid. For the time being, it seems likely that the EU 
will play little more than a limited role in harmonizing and coordinating policy. Some progress, 
however, can be noted’. Barder et al (2010) refer in this respect to ‘Brussels leadership versus stagnation 
on the ground, with the EU Code of Conduct lacking leadership both at Headquarters and country levels 
and the need for clarity as to the mandate of the EC in promoting division of labour’.
222 
See KST 21501-04-143 (2012) and KST 21501-02-1179 (2012).

EDF’s national programmes
| 184 |
Table 7.1  Country programmes by sector and resource allocation (Envelope A) (in EUR mln)
EDF Focal Non-focal 
Burkina Faso 9 Macro-economic Transport (100) Rural development and food security Democratic governance
support (150) 
10 Macro-economic Basic infrastructure Good governance (50) Integration and regional cooperation and 
support (320) and transport (140) institutional support
Ethiopia 9 Macro-economic Transport (239) Food security (60) Protection of Basic Governance and decentralization, Human 
support (58) Services (150) Rights, democratic institutions and civil society 
(33)
10 Macro-economic Transport and Rural development and food security (130) Conservation of Ethiopia’s cultural, biological 
Support and Regional Integration and environmental heritage and de-mining 
Governance (244) (250) action (20)
Rwanda 9 Macro-economic Rural development (62) Good governance / institutional support; civil 
support (50) society; regional integration and stability (12)
10 General budget Infrastructure for Rural development (40) Justice, Reconciliation, Law and Order Sector; 
support (175) regional inter-con- Voice and accountability; Statistics, PFM, trade, 
nectivity (42) regional integration and business development; 
technical cooperation facility (33)
Uganda 9 Macro-economic Transport (130) Rural development (18) Decentralisation, good governance, non-state 
support (92) actors (45)
10 Macro-economic Transport (172) Rural development (60) Democratic governance, non-state actors, 
support (186) support for NAO (21)

EDF’s national programmes
Table 7.2 Sectors of cooperation, EU and the Netherlands in Burkina Faso, Ethiopia and Rwanda
Burkina Faso Ethiopia Rwanda
EU Netherlands EU Netherlands EU Netherlands
9th EDF Macro-econo- Education and Macroeconomic Health Macro-econo- Regional security 
(2002-2007) mic support health sector support  (including HIV/ mic support Decentralisation
support AIDS) Cross-cutting 
issues (civil 
Transport Infrastructure Transport
society, 
development 
environment, 
and capacity 
gender)
building
Rural Food security Food security Rural Rural 
development development development
Democratic Good Protection of Education Non-focal: Rule of Law 
governance governance Basic Services good Participation and 
governance/ accountability 
Regional Enhance Governance Cross-cutting 
institutional Good 
integration and business and programmes
support; civil governance 
private sector environment decentraliza-
society; (human rights, 
development tion
regional demobilization, 
Non-focal: Human rights 
integration and disarmament, 
culture and democratic 
stability rehabilitation, 
institutions; 
legal 
civil society
| 186 |
counselling)
10th EDF Macro-econo- 2008-2011 Macroeconomic Good MDG-Contract
(2008-2013) mic support Education and support and governance + 
Macro-econo- health sector governance anti-corruption
mic framework support
and private Development 
sector of rural areas
development
Basic Agricultural and Transport (and HIV/AIDs and Sector Budget 
infrastructure private sector regional reproductive Support Rural 
and transport development integration) health Feeder Roads 
Support for Good Infrastructure 2008-2011
political and governance and for regional Justice and Good 
local human rights Interconnecti- Governance
governance vity (roads) Economic and 
Private Sector 
Integration and Rural Food security Sector budget 
Development
regional development Environment support for 
cooperation and food decentralised 
security agriculture
Non-focal: Non-focal: Cross-cutting Social 
culture support for programmes, Protection; 
Ethiopia’s including Justice, 
cultural, gender Reconciliation, 
biological and Peace Law and Order 
environmental rehabilitation Sector; 
heritage; Statistics, PFM, 
de-mining trade, regional 
action integration and 
business 
development 

EDF’s national programmes
226
Figure 7.1) and the signing of the MDG contracts. GBS commitments as a share of total 
EDF commitments for the year have fluctuated; it was 6% in 2006 and around 24% in 2010.  
In the three case study countries that have received GBS, its share of total EDF resources has 
been considerable:  62% in Burkina Faso, 80% in Rwanda and 42% in the case of Uganda 
th th th
under the 10 EDF. Comparing the 9 and the 10 EDF, Mackie et al (2008b) found that: (a) 
general budget support increased from 22.9% to 31.4% of the total NIPs while sector budget 
support rose from 8.8% to 16.5%; (b) the number of countries receiving budget support has 
increased from 25 to 43.The use of SBS also varies according to sector, from basically none in 
conflict prevention and environment, only 4.7% in trade and high shares in governance 
(20%), human development (27%) and rural development (30%).
Figure 7.1 GBS commitments under EDF by region, 2002-2010 (in EUR mln)




| 188 |




         
Total ACP Pacic 
Total ACP Caribbean
Total ACP Africa
In terms of GBS disbursements, Table 7.3 shows that these have totalled some EUR 5.2 
billion in the period 2002-2010, with a peak reached in 2010. Data on general budget 
support disbursements per ACP country are provided in Annex 4 (Table A.4.5). Burkina Faso, 
Ghana, Mozambique, Tanzania and Zambia (all having MDG contracts), accounted for close 
to 37% of all transfers. 
226 
Data from Commission (2007e), (2008b), (2009t), (2010aa) and (2011ac). According to the Commission 
in 2010, ‘(total) commitments for budget support rose by 110% from EUR 3.9 billion for 2001-2004 to 
EUR 8.5 billion for 2005-2008’ (Commission (2010ac)).

EDF’s national programmes
Figure 7.2 Evaluation views on general budget support







Improved PFM Contribution to Contribution to 
(17) increased pro-poor increased service 
Government spending (13) delivery (14)
Unsatisfactory
Satisfactory
The findings also make clear that there have been results in terms of improved public 
| 190 | financial management but that PFM remains a concern in most countries and that there 
continues to be a need for improvement.  This confirms observations made by the European 
Court of Auditors (2010b) on the results of general budget support related capacity 
229
building (see further the paragraphs on budget support management below). A general 
observation is furthermore that effective support was provided to PFM reform and other 
reforms when government and society were already committed thereto, but proved unable 
to generate such commitment where it did not previously exist. 
Looking at the four case study countries, general budget support was provided to Burkina 
Faso, Rwanda, and Uganda but not to Ethiopia, even though the multi-donor Protection of 
Basic Services programme operated along similar lines. In all three countries an MDG 
contract was concluded: EUR 175 million in both Rwanda and Uganda and EUR 343 million 
in the case of Burkina Faso. 
In addition, in line with the emphasis on public financial management and the need for 
better monitoring, EU support has been provided to strengthen local institutions in these 
domains. In Uganda, this has meant institutional and capacity building support (technical 
assistance, equipment, funding for reviews in the health and education sectors as well as 
surveys and monitoring and evaluation assignments) to the Budget Department, the office 
of the Prime Minister, and the Ugandan Bureau of Statistics. In Rwanda, EU support has 
been provided through a multi-donor (DFID, EU, UNDP) basket fund managed by UNDP in 
229 
The Court observed in relation to the 10th EDF that ‘capacity-building support has made useful 
contributions, especially when support was provided in response to a clear demand from the partner 
country’ – though part of the funds available had not been used while in some cases funds did not 
contribute directly to building sustainable capacity in the partner countries.

EDF’s national programmes
accountable and effective PFM, well defined macro-economic or sector policies in place and 
sufficiently open and transparent public procurement. 
A first issue to the Court was that the Commission, like other budget support donors, had 
interpreted the PFM conditions for budget support ‘dynamically’. This meant that 
weaknesses affecting PFM at the time of the financing decision did not preclude the launch 
of a budget aid programme, provided that the will for reform existed and that the reforms 
were deemed to be satisfactory. To correct this state of affairs, from 2002 onwards, each 
financing proposal had to include an annex describing the state of PFM. EU Delegations 
were required to report on the monitoring of developments in this field and the 
Commission issued a methodological guide for the programming and implementation of 
budget support for third countries (Court of Auditors (2005c)). The Commission agreed also 
to improve the quality of the budget support financing agreements, e.g. regards eligibility 
criteria and conditions for disbursements in subsequent years (Court of Auditors (2005b)).  
The Court nevertheless continued to ask for a more thorough appraisal of PFM 
developments, increased monitoring of the reforms that were intended to improve PFM 
and for more attention for problems related to corruption (Court of Auditors (2005c)). Since 
then, the Court has noticed improvement in the quality of the financing agreements, 
though further improvement was needed, e.g. in terms of providing the necessary clarity on 
232
| 192 | the disbursement of the variable tranches. In 2010, it concluded that in line with its earlier 
recommendations an ‘in the context of the Commission’s dynamic interpretation (..), 
EuropeAid demonstrated in a formalised and structured manner compliance with the 
Cotonou Agreement requirements’ and that satisfactory action had been taken as regards 
the improvement of 10th EDF financing agreements on budget support’.
On the second issue of fiduciary risks related to the release of budget support tranches, the 
th
Court found that budget support payments, mainly under the 9 EDF and the V-FLEX Facility, 
were ‘affected by a high frequency of non-quantifiable errors due to lack of formalised and 
structured demonstration of the compliance with payment conditions.’ This was the case 
primarily because ‘the Delegations’ public finance management assessment reports did not 
explain the criteria against which progress had to be assessed .., the progress made and the 
reasons why the reform programme may not have been implemented according to the 
recipient Government’s plan (Court of Auditors (2010) and (2010b). This changed in the course 
of 2010, following the introduction of a revised framework for monitoring and reporting on 
progress in PFM: no such errors were found in the transactions examined for the second half 
of 2010 (Court of Auditors. (2011a)). A significant improvement was furthermore the change in 
Delegations’ annual reporting on reforms of PFM systems. In 2011 the Court considered that 
its recommendations in this respect had been fully implemented.
232 
See also Commission (2008a) on PFM assessments and the role of EU Delegations in monitoring 
progress and reporting.  

EDF’s national programmes
Text Box 7.2 Managing budget support in Uganda
In Uganda, the Government and Development Partners (EU, World Bank, Austria, 
Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and the UK) 
agreed to cooperate and manage budget support through an annual Joint Budget 
Support Framework (JBSF). Its aim was to reduce poverty by supporting the 
Government in the implementation of its National Development Plan and to make 
the provision of such support transparent and predictable, by harmonizing 
performance assessments and aligning the timing of budget support decisions to 
the national budget process. The JBSF was managed by a Joint Budget Support 
Policy Committee, chaired by the Government and co-chaired by the World Bank, 
and a committee that resided in the JBSF Development Partner Group. There was 
also a series of sector working groups that provided indicators, targets and 
suggestions for actions needed. A Technical and Administrative Support Unit was 
established through a Multi Donor Trust Fund managed by the World Bank. Under 
the 10th EDF, the EU channelled capacity building support through this Fund. 
A three-year rolling Joint Assessment Framework recorded a set of conditions, 
selected indicators, targets and actions that were agreed upon between the parties 
| 194 |
involved.  It provided, together with the JBSF, the basis for dialogue and assess-
ment of performance. The Framework was aligned with the Government’s own 
reform objectives, presented the Government’s commitments to achieve both 
sector-specific and cross-cutting indicator targets and actions in the areas of 
governance and institutional restructuring. 
As part of the process, the Government prepared an Annual Performance Report 
that provided information on its achievements in the preceding financial year. This 
report was then appraised and scored by the JBSF development partners for each 
indicator and action. The main indicators related amongst others to procurement 
practices, domestic revenue generation, credibility of the budget, and specific 
topics in the fields of health (e.g. the number and proportion of children immuni-
zed with DPT), education (e.g. survival to final grade primary education by gender), 
transport (e.g. the number of km of national roads maintained to specified 
standards) and water and sanitation (e.g. % of people within 1.5 km of an improved 
water source in rural areas). In addition, development partners made an assess-
ment of the so-called ‘underlying principles’ governing their relations with Uganda 
(i.e. peace & stability, democracy, human rights and rule of law/access to justice) 
and of the Government’s compliance with a set of so-called ‘preconditions for 
effective and efficient implementation of government policies.’ These related to 
e.g. the Government’s macro-economic policies, fiscal policies and budgetary 
control and oversight, initiatives taken to improve public financial management 
and procurement systems, Government efforts to fight corruption and the 
Government’s commitment to poverty alleviation and economic growth. 

EDF’s national programmes
Figure 7.3 Evaluation views on health (total n=15)








Policy Institutional Increased Increased use Sustainability (6)
changes (8) capacity (15) availability of health 
 of health services by
infrastructure (15) the poor (8)
Not satisfactory
Satisfactory
| 196 | Findings are not too different from what was reported in the European Court of Auditors’ 
special report No. 10/2008 on EU development assistance to health services and the 2012 
thematic evaluation on EU support to the health sector: both are positive on the 
contribution made to improved quality of health services and improving access to these 
services. According to the evaluation this has also been the case for the poor (by 
contributing to a reduction in the costs of health services) and in disadvantaged, remote 
and post-conflict areas while the Court observed that ‘the (EDF) projects examined by the 
Court in most cases did not specifically target the poorer sections of the population’. Also 
the country evaluations are less optimistic in this respect. The evidence on the contribution 
to strengthening aid management and governance is mixed; this was also observed in 
Burkina Faso, where problems in health statistics made it difficult to come to hard 
conclusions on health service delivery despite support given to the Statistic Health 
Directorate of the Ministry of Health. All country evaluations that express an opinion on 
234
sustainability indicate their concern; the issue is also raised in the above two reports. 
Main issues are human resource constraints, ‘the persistent and continuing under-
resourcing of health sectors by beneficiary governments’ and unaddressed needs in the area 
of health finance reform. 
Observations in the evaluation reports on the four case study countries give the following 
picture. Burkina Faso observed improvements in terms of presence of qualified health staff in 
the centres de santé as well as improvements in vaccination coverage. The share of births 
234 
Particip (2012) refers in this respect to ‘the persistent and continuing under-resourcing of health sectors 
by beneficiary governments’ and ‘(while) the evaluation has found some clear evidence of successful 
impacts, it is unclear whether many of these will persist once donor support is withdrawn’..  

EDF’s national programmes
Figure 7.4 Evaluation views on education (total n = 14)











Policy Institutional Availability of Access Improved Targeting 
reforms (5) capacity (9) teaching to be�er enrolment and the poor (9)
infrastructure (11) education (8) completion 
rates (14)
Not satisfactory
Satisfactory
| 198 |
The findings are in line with what was reported in IOB’s evaluation Education matters: 
Policy review of the Dutch contribution to basic education 1999-2009 (IOB (2011)), which 
amongst others refers to serious concerns about the institutional capacity of education 
systems in many countries. In the case of Uganda, findings are not too different from what 
was reported in IOB’s impact evaluation on primary education in Uganda of 2008: whereas 
the country had been successful in improving access to education by increasing the number 
of schools, classrooms, teachers and books and the net enrolment had increased to above 
90%, the quality of education was still a major problem (IOB (2008c)). The findings also 
correspond with what was reported by the European Court of Auditors in 2010 (Court of 
Auditors (2010c)) and the thematic global evaluation of European Commission support to 
the education sector in partner countries (Particip GmbH (2010)). These reports refer 
amongst others to the contribution made to increasing access, especially in Sub-Saharan 
Africa, better enrolment than completion rates, and declining gender disparity. They are 
more critical as regard the quality of education, partly as a result of an insufficient numbers 
of qualified teachers. They also mention improvements in education sector resource 
management systems (policies, strategies, finances) but at the same time continue to 
identify constraints in terms of institutional capacity and limited effectiveness of EU aid to 
address these constraints.

EDF’s national programmes
Findings, shown in Figure 7.5, indicate that the results in terms of policies and physical 
results are rated more satisfactory as far as national roads are concerned; this is less the case 
235
for feeder roads. The evaluations are more critical about the attention given to building 
up of the necessary institutional capacity, while for all, future funding of maintenance 
236
remains a concern.  
Figure 7.5 Evaluation views on transport infrastructure (total n=18)











Sector Institutional Construction Construction Aention for Funding for Targeting 
| 200 |
policy reforms capacity (16) and and road road the poor (9)
(14) rehabilitation rehabilitation maintenance maintenance 
of national of feeder (19) (18)
roads (16) roads (13)
Not satisfactory
Satisfactory
The picture does not change dramatically when excluding evaluations that were conducted 
before 2007 and which could reflect the pre-reform situation.  The exception is that newer 
evaluations are comparatively more positive about the targeting of road infrastructure on 
the needs of the poor. This is in line with the recommendation made in 2004 to ‘(put) 
sharper focus on the contribution of EC transport sector interventions to poverty 
alleviation’ (ADE (2004)).
 The findings from the four case study countries in Table 7.9 make clear that the EU has 
focused on major/national roads that provide better connections with major urban centres 
and neighbouring countries (e.g. road construction for the Northern corridor route in 
235 
On policies, this is in line with what was reported also in 2004: ‘In ACP countries, EC interventions 
contributed to the formulation and implementation of transport policies consistent with a sectoral 
approach to transport aiming at a sustainable development of the sector’ (ADE (2004)).
236 
Again, this is not too different from what was observed in ADE (2004): ‘Although progress has been 
registered, sustainability of transport is far from secure in most ACP countries. The resources allocated 
to maintenance remain short of need. Infrastructure investments are financed to a large extent by 
foreign aid and will continue for a long time to rely on foreign funding. Enhancing the capacity of 
government agencies would imply far-reaching civil service reforms that governments are reluctant to 
implement’.

EDF’s national programmes
was furthermore provided to the Ministry of Works and Transport as well as the Uganda 
National Roads Authority. 
Water and sanitation
The EU has supported the development of the water and sanitation sector in a series of 
countries. Water and sanitation was at times one of the EU’s focal sectors, in other countries 
interventions were small scale only and funded through micro-projects. Interventions 
ranged from the expansion and improvement of water and sanitation infrastructure to 
support for water user organisations (see Table 7.10). They were carried out with 
government institutions (such as the Office national de l’eau et de l’assainissement in 
Burkina Faso and the Office National de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement de Djibouti) through 
NGOs (e.g. Chad), or a UN organisation like UNICEF (Djibouti). In relation to water and 
sanitation, we looked at whether country evaluations considered that changes with respect 
to the following aspects were satisfactory or not: (i) sector policies; (ii) institutional 
capacity; (iii) construction and rehabilitation of water and sanitation infrastructure and 
whether these served the poor and (iv) sustainability prospects. 
Table 7.10 Main EU supported interventions in water and sanitation
| 202 |
Water infrastructure              
Sanitation infrastructure              
Institutional aspects              
Financial aspects              
User organisations              
Findings (see Figure 7.6) indicate that results in terms of policies and physical results are 
rated more satisfactory than those in terms of institutional capacity and sustainability. Few 
evaluations refer to targeting of the interventions on the poor, reflecting that EU 
interventions tend to support larger interventions for entire populations (e.g. the 
rehabilitation of water supply of Monrovia (Liberia)). 
 
Angola
Burkina Faso
Chad
Comoros
Djibouti
Ghana
Guyana
Lesotho
Liberia
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Senegal
Seychelles

EDF’s national programmes
Table 7.11 Main EU supported interventions in rural and agricultural development
Policy development             
Institutional development and staff training             
Inputs for food/cash crop production             
Producer organisations             
Environmental aspects             
For the evaluations that dealt with rural or agricultural development, the findings are 
summarised in Figure 7.7. They show that evaluations are more positive about results in terms 
of introducing relevant sector policies and improved production at small holder level. This 
overall picture does not change dramatically when excluding evaluations that were conducted 
before 2007 and which could reflect the pre-reform situation. However, newer evaluations find 
| 204 | that attention for the environment in agricultural development has increased.
Figure 7.7 Evaluation views on rural/agricultural development (total n = 12)











Sector Institutional Improved production Improved Sustainability 
policies (8) capacity (12) by small environment al agricultural 
holders (12) management (8) services (5)
Not satisfactory
Satisfactory
Findings are not too different from what was reported in thematic evaluations of EC support to 
agricultural and rural development in ACP countries (ADE (2007a) and (2012)) and by the 
European Court of Auditors (Court of Auditors (2012)). The 2012 evaluation observed that 
Commission support has contributed to an improved availability and use of market information 
and advisory services to producers and producer organisations – though with mixed results. On 
the issue of increased production and productivity, the 2007 evaluation comes to similar 
 
Burkina Faso
Comoros
Ethiopia
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Rwanda
Tanzania
Uganda

EDF’s national programmes
cooperation and support programmes and projects implemented by the various actors’. 
More specifically on gender, the Agreement also refers to encouraging the adoption of 
specific positive measures in favour of women. The revision of 2005 calls for a gender 
dimension and equality in poverty reduction strategies, promotion of sexual and 
reproductive health and rights of women and enforcing labour and social standards. It 
states that ‘(systematic) account shall be taken of the situation of women and gender issues 
in all areas – political, economic and social’. Outside the Cotonou Agreement, gender is 
237
mentioned in a range of Commission and/or Council documents. 
According to the OECD (1998), following the Gender Equality Resolution of 1995, the 
Commission had made ‘major strides in the area of gender over the past decade, starting 
from a low base’ and ACP country strategies and national indicative programmes 
increasingly referred to gender equality in preambles. Nevertheless only few contained 
substantive sections or proposals for improved gender equality. In 2002, OECD found that 
there remained a gap between ‘policy statements and the actual practice’ as a result of ‘the 
lack of a gender strategy for the countries, of gender analysis of individual programmes and 
projects’ (OECD (2002)). Five years later, it observed that ‘gender issues were not consistently 
addressed in programme implementation’ (OECD (2007)) and there remained a need to 
demonstrate successful actual implementation of gender policy. Again five years later, OECD 
observed that ‘(the) Commission has made progress in mainstreaming gender equality’ 
| 206 | (OECD (2012)). OECD highlighted the adoption of the ambitious EU Plan of Action 2010-15 
on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment in Development in 2010, but found that it 
was ‘still unevenly implemented’: no specific resources have been allocated to implement it 
and capacity is limited both at headquarters and in the field (OECD (2012)). 
Looking at 23 country evaluations that cover the cross-cutting themes of governance, 
human rights, rule of law, gender and environment, 17 make clear that these themes are 
indeed mentioned in the programming documents, but that this has remained mainly a 
237 
Gender equality has appeared in a series of Council conclusions, resolutions and regulations adopted 
since 1995, including Council Resolution 12847/95 on integrating gender issues in development 
cooperation (December 1995), Council Regulation (EC) 2836/98 of December 1998, Council conclusions 
9561/07 of May 2007 on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment in Development and 9907/08. In 
2008, the Council stated that ‘(the) promotion of gender equality and the enjoyment of human rights 
by women and girls are goals in their own right and also instrumental and essential to achieving 
internationally agreed development goals, including the MDGs. Gender equality is a core value of the 
EU and is crucial for the effectiveness and sustainability of the partner countries’ development 
processes’ (Council (2008e)). Gender equality is also reflected in series of Commission communications, 
like the 2000 Communication ‘Towards a Community Framework Strategy on Gender Equality’, a 
‘Programme of Action for the mainstreaming of Gender Equality in Community Development 
Co-operation’ for 2001-2006, the regulation on ‘Promoting Gender Equality and Development 
Cooperation’ (April 2004), its Communication COM (2007)100 final ‘Gender Equality and Women 
Empowerment in Development Cooperation’ of March 2007. Also the European Consensus includes a 
commitment to gender and gender equality amongst others that ‘the empowerment of women is the 
key to all development and gender equality should be a core part of all policy strategies’.  

EDF’s national programmes
239
subject to environmental impact assessment in compliance with national legislation. 
Environmental concerns were also dealt with through the agricultural Sector Support Programme 
(soil fertility, appropriate resource management, wet-land management, and research), a Forestry 
Resources Management and Conservation Programme and regional intervention for the Lake 
Victoria basin. However, there was no evidence that the supported National Agricultural Advisory 
Service had succeeded in systematically passing messages to the farming community on how to 
achieve sustainable development and especially maintain soil fertility.  
Sustainability concerns
OECD (2002a) defines sustainability as ‘(the) continuation of benefits from a development intervention after 
major development assistance has been completed’ and ‘The probability of continued long-term benefits. The 
resilience to risk of the net benefit flows over time’. Taking this as a starting point, we looked at what the 
country evaluations have to say about whether the institutional capacity and finances were 
considered satisfactory or not.  
The preceding paragraphs make clear that institutional capacity is still a key concern. This is true for 
all other areas of intervention, but particularly in road infrastructure and education. In terms of 
future funding, only one evaluation considers that it is ensured in a satisfactory manner in 
agricultural and rural development and one evaluation in education. Other evaluations either do 
| 208 | not express a clear opinion or mention this as a key concern. Opinions differ on the sustainability of 
budget support, especially when there is no increase in national revenues or an increase in the 
domestic resource base. However, it has contributed at times (an example is Burkina Faso) to a 
certain degree of macro-economic stabilisation, an essential condition for sustainable 
development.  
With respect to the four country case studies, it is evident that the issue of sustainability must be 
seen in context, with countries such as Burkina Faso, Ethiopia and Rwanda likely remaining aid 
dependent for some time to come. For example in the case of Rwanda, close to 40% of the national 
budget is externally funded, with budget support representing over 55% of aid. This dependency 
relates inter alia to (i) a limited national resource base – and henceforth limited public funding to 
ensure recurrent cost financing; (ii) a low share of taxes of the countries’ GNP; and (iii) persistent 
human resource constraints and limited institutional capacity in key sectors (e.g. in the road sector 
in Rwanda and Ethiopia).  In Ethiopia, questions were raised as regard the sustainability of the 
approach to food security constraints – focusing too much on bridging food deficits and less on 
agricultural development. According to the 2004 country evaluation, while food aid had absorbed 
an increasing and major share of the available resources, it only helped to bridge current food 
deficits but did not bring about a sustainable improvement of the food security situation. Along the 
same lines, the 2011 evaluation concludes that the balance between EU support to food security and 
agricultural development, although improved, still predominantly leans towards food security.
239 
Moreover, tender dossiers included provisions for appropriate HIV/AIDS awareness campaigns and 
gender issues. Implementation remained an issue until 2002-2003 after which things have changed to a 
certain extent; e.g. collaboration with the Makerere University Medical School on HIV/AIDS was sought.

EDF’s national programmes
Text Box 7.3 Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Nets Programme 
th
Using resources from the 9 EDF and the Thematic Food Security budget line, the 
EU directed the bulk of its aid for rural development and food security to the PSNP, 
a World Bank managed multi-donor programme that started in 2005. The EU has 
been one of the donors of the PSNP, contributing about 13% in 2005-09 and about 
4% since 2010. PSNP aims ‘to provide transfers to the food insecure population in 
chronically food insecure woredas (districts) in a way that prevents asset depletion 
at the household level and creates assets at the community level’ and to bridge the 
food gap that arises when food production and other sources of income are 
insufficient. The programme operates as a safety net, targeting transfers to poor 
households through public works and direct support. Under the public works 
component selected beneficiaries were paid the equivalent of some US$0.75 per 
day to work on labour-intensive projects and some 180,000 community-level 
assets were realised over the years (including the rehabilitation of highly degraded 
environments, feeder roads, health posts, etc.). Activities were planned in the 
months that no farming took place. Direct support, in the form of cash or food 
transfers, was provided to the poorest households that have no labour to spare 
(e.g. because of disability). Depending on where they live, beneficiaries either 
received cash or an equivalent payment in food, primarily wheat, maize and 
| 210 |
cooking oil.
In its evaluation, IFPRI used longitudinal community and household level data sets 
collected in 2006, 2008 and 2010 and covered over 3,300 randomly selected 
households (beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries.  IFPRI report showed that: (i) the 
programme had reduced the number of months that households were unable to 
satisfy their food needs by a statistically significant 1.05 months. Through direct 
support, it had realised occasional reductions of this ‘food gap’ by two months; (ii) 
for children it had implied a significant increase in food consumption during the 
lean season; (iii) rural households had been able to raise livestock holdings as 
means of saving resources for future situations of distress. The evaluation 
moreover observed reduced soil degradation, intensification of tree planting on 
degraded communal lands, an increased use of crop varieties and fertilizers and an 
expansion of the use of irrigation. 

EDF’s national programmes
244
effectiveness and sustainability of poverty alleviation initiatives at EU level. More recently, 
the Netherlands underlined that it was important that possibilities for policy dialogue with 
the countries concerned were properly used by both Commission and EU Member States 
and urged the Commission to incorporate issues of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender in 
245
its Article 8 dialogue in Africa.  
On this political dialogue, Article 8 of the Cotonou Agreement stipulates that the Parties to 
the Agreement ‘shall engage in a comprehensive, balanced and deep political dialogue 
leading to commitments on both sides’. The objective is to exchange information, foster 
mutual understanding and facilitate ‘the establishment of agreed priorities and shared 
agendas.’ The dialogue shall ‘cover all the aims and objectives’ of the Agreement and may 
cover a broad spectrum of issues, including ‘the arms trade, excessive military expenditure, 
drugs, organised crime or child labour, or discrimination of any kind, such as race, colour, 
sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth 
or other status’. Guidelines for the dialogue were agreed upon in May 2003 followed  
by guidelines for applying Article 96 in 2005 in conjunction with the first revision of  
the Agreement. 
There is little if any systematic research into the actual working of the Article 8 political 
| 212 | dialogue and whether it meets the aims set out in the Cotonou Agreement. Commission 
evaluations tend to say little on a process that is to a large extent taking place ‘behind the 
scenes’. Findings of the country evaluations that do report on this dialogue are variable. 
Some indicate that it has been weak or non-existent (e.g. Angola, Chad, Comoros, Congo, 
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Djibouti, Lesotho, Malawi, Senegal, and Tanzania), while others are more 
positive (e.g. in the case of Liberia, Rwanda, and, to a certain extent Uganda). Some of the 
factors that have contributed to low level of dialogue and limited results include: 
•	 	Governments are difficult to engage in political dialogue on key topics that it considers as 
internal matters (Angola, Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia) – or not (Botswana). 
•	 	Dependency on foreign aid and presence of other donors that do not put up political 
conditionalities with their aid.
•	 	The donor community was either not clear on political aspects or divided (Mozambique, 
Niger), with the dialogue moreover hampered by a lack of knowledge of the local political 
situation (Niger). 
•	 T	 ension between political and development agenda and continued support for macro-
economic policies and reforms despite little progress on the governance or human rights 
side (Kenya, Zambia). 
244 
See for example KST 26352 (1997), KST 61952 (2002), KST 77370 (2004), KST 108425B (2007), KST 132821 
B (2009), KST 128498 (2009) and KST 32710-V-1 (2011). 
245 
The recent IOB Evaluation of Dutch support to human rights projects 2008-2011 (IOB (2013)) points in 
this respect at the cooperation between EU and the Netherlands in Zimbabwe on human rights issues 
and the Netherlands using the EU channel to address the protection of the human rights of lesbian, gay, 
bisexual and transgender (LGBT) individuals.

EDF’s national programmes
and violations of other fundamental freedoms. The drastic deterioration of the human 
rights rather than the absolute level of these essential elements was decisive in this respect. 
There have been no cases where human rights violations were the only motive for holding 
consultations. In all cases, Article 96 consultations have led to the application or 
continuation of ‘appropriate measures’, ranging from the non-notification of new 
resources to the suspension of technical and financial aid. In addition to the appropriate 
measures, the EU may adopt sanctions within the framework of its Common Foreign and 
Security Policy – an obvious case is Zimbabwe (Portela (2007)).
Success of the measures taken, defined in terms of sufficient progress in addressing the 
reasons for which the dialogue was initiated and for the EU to resume aid, has been 
variable. Factors that have contributed to the success stories include in particular the 
248
following :
 
•	 	The selective use of the tool and the timeliness of initiation of the Article 96 
consultations. Consultations are called only when the EU believes that it stands a 
reasonable chance of influencing the leadership in breach (referred by Laakso et al (2007) 
as intended incoherence).
•	 	The commitment of the authorities of the ACP country: If there is no political will, Article 
| 214 | 96 is of little or no use.
•	 	The application of appropriate measures that combine carrots, making sure there is an 
interest in cooperation with the EU such as the gradual resumption of aid provided that 
certain conditions are met as happened for example in the case of Guinea Bissau, and 
sticks. 
•	 	Dependency on EU aid, with more EU leverage when this dependency is high.
•	 	Coherence in the actions taken by the EU as a whole and by the individual Member 
249
States , with the Commission generally only proposing the use of Article 96 when it is 
sure that Member States will support it (an exception being the case of Corte d’Ivoire in 
2004). Dissenting opinions, especially at local level, can erode the effectiveness of the EU 
approach as happened in Guinea. 
•	 	The involvement of ‘friendly countries’ or ‘ACP peers’, neighbouring countries and 
regional organisations, including the African Union and for example ECOWAS in the case 
of Guinea Bissau 
•	 	Clear identification of the steps that need to be taken by the country and the adoption of 
positive measures by the EU to assist in achieving these steps.
•	 	Continuation of the political dialogue during and after the Article 96 procedure.
At the same time, it has been realised that consultations remain ill-suited to provide for 
lasting solutions to deep-rooted instability in weak states.
248 
Mbangu (2005), Laakso et al (2007), Portela (2007), Cuyckens (2010) and Vines (2012)
249  
Though in comparison with other international sanctions, notably those imposed by the UN, 
non-compliance with EU measures is infrequent (Portela and Raube (2011)), in the case of Guinea, the 
EU adopted ‘appropriate measures’ while at the same time, the former colonial power, France, 
increased its bilateral aid to Guinea, reducing the impact of the measures. 

EDF’s national programmes
sector policy dialogue. General budget support is also found to have contributed, though not always 
sufficiently, to improved PFM. At the same time, evaluations make clear that effective support to PFM and 
other reforms was only effective when there was a commitment on the partner country side. 
Public sector capacity building has accompanied the provision of budget support; according to the European 
Court of Auditors this has not always been sufficiently the case. The Court moreover has raised objections against 
the dynamic way in which the Commission has interpreted the eligibility criteria of the Cotonou Agreement 
though acknowledged that this was also the case for other donors. In terms of management of budget support, 
the Court has noticed improvements in the quality of financing agreements, the way in which fiduciary risks were 
dealt with and the predictability of budget support. It was more critical on the appropriateness of the use of the 
variable tranche mechanism and the realism of the indicators used in this respect.
With respect to results in the different sectors, findings from the country evaluations are briefly as follows. In 
the social sectors (health, education, and water and sanitation), evaluations are more positive about the 
results obtained in terms of policies and expansion of infrastructure and coverage of services. In both health 
and education, the quality of these services remains an issue. Key concerns for all three areas are the limited 
results in terms of institution building and sustainability, including the capability of the countries and 
beneficiaries to continue funding of operation and maintenance costs. On road infrastructure, evaluations 
are again more positive about policy aspects and physical results in terms of roads constructed, rehabilitated 
| 216 | and maintained, but point to same concerns as mentioned above: institutional capacities, though often a key 
component of EU aid to the sector, and budget for recurrent costs.  Evaluations on agricultural and rural 
development follow a similar pattern in their judgment on institutional capacity and sustainability; they are 
more positive about the results in terms of policy development and developments at smallholder level. Mixed 
results in this respect appear from the country cases and other evaluations. In the absence of rigorous impact 
evaluation, with few exceptions, little is known of (net) outcomes.
While in aid planning there is attention for cross cutting issues such as gender and environment, in practice 
this attention frequently evaporates, though the situation varies from country to country. 
The Cotonou Agreement attaches great importance to the Article 8 ACP-EU political dialogue. Regrettably, 
there is little systematic research into the actual working of this dialogue and whether it meets the purposes 
set out in this Agreement. Some evaluations point out that this dialogue has been weak (e.g. because the 
Member States take different positions, the Government is hesitant to discuss topics that it considers as 
internal matters), others are more positive and highlight some, generally modest, results. 
More is known of what happened when the dialogue failed and appropriate measures that were taken after 
the consultations that were held on the basis of Article 96 of the Agreement. This happened following a coup 
d’état or other sudden drastic deterioration of the human rights and governance situation in 12 ACP countries 
in the period 2000-2010. With the exception of Zimbabwe and Guinea, these appropriate measures have 
contributed to sufficient changes with respect the essential and fundamental elements of the Agreement to 
allow the Council to agree to a (gradual) resumption of the aid relationship. Success factors have included: (a) 
the selective use of Article 96 consultations; (b) appropriate measures that combined carrots and sticks; (c) the 
commitment of the ACP countries concerned; (d) coherence in the actions of EU and Member States; and (e) 
the involvement of ‘friendly countries’, ACP peers, neighbouring states or regional organisations.

8
ACP regional programmes

ACP regional programmes
building regional integrated markets, supporting business development, connecting regional 
infrastructure networks and developing regional policies for sustainable development. It stressed 
that the priorities for European support for regional integration would need to be tailored to the 
priorities identified with each region’ (Commission (2009w)). In 2010, the Council, once more 
reaffirmed the ‘high importance the EU attaches to regional economic integration as an 
important vehicle for economic growth and poverty reduction’ and its potential contribution to 
the achievement of the primary objective of EU aid policy as well as to the attainment of the MDGs 
253
(Council (2010g)). In 2012, the Council ‘(stressed) the need to continue supporting regional 
integration processes with a strong emphasis on the requirements of LDCs, and the poorest and 
most vulnerable populations, with the aim of overcoming the drawbacks of small and fragmented 
markets’, to make countries more attractive to foreign direct investment and to ‘spur economic 
growth and sustainable development’ (Council (2012i)).
The Dutch position on regional integration and cooperation is broadly in line with that of the 
254
Union. Both in 2006 and 2007, the Netherlands stated that it attached importance to the 
intensified dialogue between Africa and the Union and to support for (capacity building of ) 
255
regional organisations in Africa ‘so that regional internal markets’ can function better. The 
Netherlands also underscored the importance of the EPAs for the ACP countries provided that 
the ‘development dimension’ of the EPAs came first - in terms of WTO compliance of trade 
| 220 | relation with EU, promoting integration into the world economy as well as regional 
integration and further improved access to European markets. 
8.2  Regional cooperation and integration and the Cotonou 
Agreement
While Article 2 of the Cotonou Agreement states that ‘(particular) emphasis shall be placed on 
the regional dimension’, Article 6 includes ACP regional organisations (including sub-regional 
organisations) and the African Union as ‘actors of cooperation’. Regional and continental 
integration are furthermore among the topics of the Article 8 political and may in turn involve 
the ‘relevant ACP regional organisations and the African Union, where appropriate’. Section 3 
of the Cotonou Agreement is entirely devoted to the subject of regional cooperation and 
256
integration and was considerably revamped after the revision of 2010.  As mentioned by 
253 
Discussing the one-year implementation of the EU strategy for security and development in the Sahel 
region in March 2012, the Council ‘encouraged the strengthening of on-going regional cooperation to 
accompany national strategies to promote the stability and development of the countries concerned’ 
(Council (2012c)).
254 
See for example KST 48648 (2000), KST 54810 (2001), KST 84463 (2005), KST 99333_2 (2006) and KST 
107322 (2007). 
255 
Including the African Union, Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Intergovernmental 
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the Southern African Development Community (SADC).
256 
The Cotonou Agreement stipulates furthermore that regional cooperation shall cover operations 
benefiting and involving: (a) two or more (or all (until 2010)) ACP States; and/or (b) a regional body of which 
at least two ACP States are members. Non-ACP countries involved in the possible groups of states meant 
under (a) and (b) are also included. Regional cooperation can also involve OCTs and outermost regions.

ACP regional programmes
8.3  Regional programmes
Main features
Within the framework of the EDF, regional cooperation and integration are addressed 
th
through regional programmes. Before the 9 EDF, these programmes were agreed between 
the Commission and individual ACP countries of the region concerned, with regional 
projects often providing additional funding for national activities rather than supporting 
clearly designed regional policies.  Nowadays, programming involves regional organisations 
with a mandate to pursue regional economic integration. The Commission, together with 
these organisations, with one organisation designated as ‘Regional Authorising Officer’, is 
to prepare and agree upon multi-annual Regional Strategy Papers (RSPs) and Indicative 
Programmes (IPs) for each region. Such programming may include a consultation with 
eligible non-State actors. The 2010 revision of the Cotonou Agreement states in this respect 
that these non-state actors should be represented at regional level and that, where relevant, 
regional parliaments should be involved.
These RSPs and IPs cover six regions, i.e. West Africa, Eastern and Southern Africa and the 
Indian Ocean, the Southern Africa Development Community, Central Africa, the Caribbean, 
and the Pacific.  The RSPs are meant to ensure a certain level of local ownership of the 
| 222 | supported programmes and are assessed by the iQSG in the same procedure as for the 
country programmes. They provide information on (a) the focal and non-focal sectors and 
themes of Community aid; (b) the most appropriate measures and operations identified to 
achieve the objectives set for those sectors and themes; (c) the projects and programmes 
needed to attain those objectives and (d) a first allocation of the resources available. An 
th th
overview of the RIPs under the 9 and 10 EDF is provided in Annex 4 (Table A.4.7). 
th
The signing of the RIPs under the 10 EDF was delayed ‘because of the complexity of the 
process, the difficult EPA negotiations and the geographical configuration of the regions, 
each of which has several regional organisations with partially overlapping memberships’ 
and the fact that ‘the regional organisations were not sufficiently prepared for a greater role 
in programming and implementing EU aid’ (Piebalgs (2012)).
th
Under the 9 EDF the final amount committed for regional programmes was EUR 904 
million, with 70% dedicated to regional economic integration interventions. Under the 
th
10 EDF the total allocation increased to EUR 1,783 million, with the share of regional 
economic integration going up to 75 %, reflecting, according to the Commission, the 
EU-ACP consensus on the importance of regional integration for development 
(Commission (2008e)). This doubling of the regional integration allocation was according 
to Piebalgs (2012) justified because the RIPs had taken on a new meaning, with the 
negotiation of the EPAs and the strengthening of the political mandates of African regional 
organisations. The allocated amounts by region are given in Table 8.1 (including the 
th
allocations under the 8 EDF).

ACP regional programmes
Table 8.2 F ocal areas and non-focal areas of the 10th EDF regional programmes and funds 
committed (in EUR mln)
Region Policy areas
Southern African Focal areas: Regional economic integration (EUR 93); Regional political 
Development cooperation, including support ‘for the regional pillar of pan-African architec-
Community ture of peace and security: accompanying the operationalisation of the SADC 
Stand-by Force by ad-hoc training of police forces; strengthening the 
capacity of the Regional Early Warning Centre in terms of logistics, technical 
tools and professional skills; mediation: training of mediators and experts’ 
(EUR 17).
Non-focal area: Technical Cooperation Facility; Support to non-state actors (6)
Central Africa Focal areas: Support to economic and trade agenda (including natural 
resource management at regional level) (85-90%); Support for political 
integration (5-8%)
Non-focal areas: Institutional support and technical cooperation facility
Caribbean Focal area: Regional economic integration and cooperation and EPA priority 
areas (EUR 143)
Non-focal area: Addressing vulnerabilities and social issues (EUR 22)
Pacific Focal areas: Regional economic Integration (EUR 45); Sustainable manage-
ment of natural resources and the environment (EUR 40)
| 224 |
Non-focal area: institutional capacity building (EUR 10)
As is evident from the above, a major share of the regional budgets has been devoted to 
‘regional economic integration’ and is related to the EPAs. These regional Aid for Trade 
packages (see Text Box 8.1), supporting regional ACP integration agendas and 
implementation of the EPAs, were initiated in 2008 with the blessing of the Council.  The 
role of these packages is to support the regional integration agendas of the ACP countries by 
providing a coordinated and increased financial response from the EU (i.e. European 
Community and Member States) to the needs and priorities expressed by the ACP countries 
and regions, including for implementation of the EPAs that are agreed or being negotiated 
between the EU and ACP regions (Commission (2009w)). 
Text Box 8.1 Aid for Trade
Aid for Trade is supports partner countries’ efforts to develop the basic economic 
infrastructure and tools they need to expand their trade. The Aid for Trade Initiative 
covers six broad categories of activities under the following main headings (a) 
Trade Related Assistance, i.e. (i) Trade policy and regulations and (ii) Trade 
development and (b) the Wider Aid for Trade agenda, i.e. (iii) Trade-related 
physical infrastructure; (iv) Building productive capacity; (v) Trade-related adjust-
ment (e.g. contributions to government budget to implement trade reforms and 
trade policy measures) and (vi) Other trade-related needs that are not captured by 
the above categories above (Commission (2011ae)). In October 2007, the Council 
adopted the EU’s Aid for Trade Strategy which was to ‘help Member States and

ACP regional programmes
2009. Moreover, external studies on the EDF have touched upon the topic of regional 
261
integration as well. The main findings of these sources are provided below.
The evaluations come to different assessments as regards the regional programming 
process. In both East and Southern Africa and West Africa, findings are basically positive on 
the involvement of regional organisations in the formulation and implementation of the 
th
regional programmes under the 9 EDF. For the SADC region on the other hand, the 
formulation of the RSP and RIP took place at a time when SADC was undergoing major 
organizational and strategic reforms suggesting that there was little involvement of SADC 
member states in setting the agendas for the RIP. In the Caribbean region, the evaluation 
observed that the dialogue between the Commission and the Caribbean was characterised 
by ‘the absence of an authentic strategic view, shared by the partners, concerning the 
regional integration process and its impact on the region’s development’. As regards the 
involvement of non-state actors in the programming process, the regional evaluations are 
unanimous: the participation of civil society and private actors has been limited, or only 
‘symbolic’. 
In terms of implementation, the evaluations first of all note the complex context in which 
the regional programmes are carried out with the six regions identified by the Commission 
262 
| 226 | – in relation to the EPAs –not corresponding with existing regional set-up.
 This is evident from the listing of existing regional organisations below (Text Box 8.1). 
Especially in Africa, the Commission has to deal with a multiplicity of regional 
organisations, and sometimes also specialised sector organisations at regional level  
263
(e.g. four in East Africa and two in West Africa ). Individual ACP countries are often 
members of more than one of these organisations, while the regions, as defined by the 
Commission, comprise countries that vary significantly in size, population, access to 
seaports, social indicators (like poverty), political (in)stability, and applicable EU-trade 
regimes. This institutional complexity has posed challenges to the countries, the regional 
organisations and for the implementation of the EU’s regional programmes. It has also 
261 
According to Piebalgs (2012), a mid-term review of the RIPs was done; its results have however not yet 
been published at the time of writing of this report.
262 
According to Dornberg (2011), ‘(the) way these groupings were chosen had nothing to do with reality as 
it did not take into consideration already existing regional groupings such as Common Market of 
Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) or Southern African Development Community (SADC). Instead, 
these regions were split and LDCs and non-LDCs mixed together’. See also Meyn (2008), Farel (2010) 
and Kühnhardt (2010) who compares the overlap of membership of the manifold of regional groupings 
across the African continent with an image of the solar system. According to Mackie et al (2008b), a 
major step forward in African regional integration processes occurred at a summit in October 2008, 
when the East African Community (EAC), the South African Development Community (SADC) and the 
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) decided to work towards a merger (Mackie 
et al (2008b)).
263 
Other organisations ‘mandated for the 10th EDF regional programming include the West African 
Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), in which case there was an agreement with ECOWAS’ to 
implement jointly a ‘strategy of acceleration of the integration process in West Africa’. This strategy 
envisages a co-operation mechanism and convergence between the two regional organisations’ 
(Commission (2008e)).

ACP regional programmes
many other pressing national needs, did not always give a high priority to regional 
integration: There is often a lack of political support and capacity or budgetary constraints 
at national level which undermine translating regional commitments and priorities into 
action (Mackie et al (2010a). This, in turn, translated in some cases into lack of ownership – 
266
which was not particularly helpful in programme implementation. Regional programmes 
often lack well-defined policy objectives that are not sufficiently aligned with country 
interests. The consistency between national and regional strategies is often not clearly 
worked (Mackie et al (2010a). The Commission refers to ‘low absorption capacities of 
Regional Economic Communities .. and low ownership of the integration process by 
partner countries’ (Commission (2012f )).
Moreover, while some evaluations found it too early to draw conclusions, concerns have 
been raised as regards the weak financial sustainability of regional organisations, which are 
largely donor-funded with low contributions from their own member states.
In terms of specific results, the reports point at: 
•	 	Increased technical capabilities of regional organisations. At the same time, despite the 
Commission’s capacity building support, these capabilities were found to be limited, 
| 228 | albeit in varying degrees. Capacity constraints affected the entire project cycle, from 
programming to implementation, reporting and financial management. The 
organisations’ capacity to effectively monitor the regional integration process was found 
limited as well; till recently, many regional organisations lacked a built-in M&E 
267 268
function. The Commission shared this position in 2009 and 2011. 
•	 Infrastructure and transport projects contributing to the opening-up of landlocked 
countries. There was also a move towards integrated regional road sector programmes 
and policies. At the same time, evaluations observed that the liberalisation of regional 
transport markets was still  in its infancy and (ii) a lack of resources for regional 
investment. 
The Court of Auditors states at the same time that ‘it has been difficult (…) and in some cases 
impossible, to assess the effectiveness of individual interventions, because their objectives 
are often not well defined and the necessary information is frequently lacking due to 
inadequate quality and frequency of project reporting, monitoring and evaluation’. 
266 
This is not too different from the findings reported in the Synopsis of the evaluation of the late 1990s, 
stating that ‘the weak commitment of ACP countries to regional organisations has led in the past to 
weak result in regional cooperation programmes’.
267 
See Salomon and Akanni Honvo (2009a), (2009b) and (2010).
268 
The Commission observed that despite some progress, the ‘technical and managerial capacity of the 
regional organisations has not kept pace’ with the increased funding and centralisation of aid 
management with these organisations  (Commission (2009g)). Along the same lines, it was stated that 
though regional organisations were the ‘natural leaders’ in trade, ‘yet many lack the capacity or 
authority to coordinate their own members and donors in a strategic way and collectively define 
regional needs and priorities’ and ‘actual progress in the regions’ remains too slow’ (Commission 
(2011g)).

ACP regional programmes
relating to trade and transport issues. However, the implementation of such agreements by 
the national authorities is lagging behind and the free movement of goods, services, capital 
and people is not yet a reality in either of the two regions’. Evidently, this needs to be within 
context: first of all, the ‘particularly complex institutional setting and low administrative 
capacities’, secondly ‘putting regional integration into practice is a long-term strategic 
choice, with significant challenges. The EU itself, with more favourable circumstances in all 
respects, is still in the making as an integrated single market (for instance for services) after 
more than 50 years of history’. 
8.5  The Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs)  
and trade
Reasons for changing the Lomé trade regime
Starting with the Yaoundé Convention of 1963, agreements between the ACP countries and 
the EU have covered trade. However, this was not a great success. The unilateral preferences 
granted under the Lomé Agreements, combined with substantial financial support under 
the EDF, had done little in kick-starting economic development (Meyn (2008)). When 
excluding South Africa, there was little change in the total values traded between the two 
| 230 | sides and in fact the ACP share in European imports had gone down from close to 8% in 
1975 to half of that in 2000. Moreover the special trade regime with the ACP had turned 
WTO and GATT incompatible; a GATT waiver to maintain this status quo came to an end in 
2000. The problem with the Lomé arrangements was that they discriminated between ACP 
and non-ACP countries of similar levels of development. 
Against this background, the EU and the ACP agreed in the Cotonou Agreement to alter the 
272
trade regime by negotiating WTO-compatible, regional Economic Partnership Agreements 
that would cover trade in both good and services and deal with ‘behind the border’ issues, 
such as competition, government procurement, intellectual property, and trade facilitation’ 
(Meyn (2008)). In the meantime, existing, non-reciprocal Lomé trade preferences were 
273
extended to 31 December 2007. Though traditionally favouring world-wide trade 
liberalisation, especially for LDCs, as opposed to regional free trade agreements with groups 
of ACP countries (KST 35637 (1999)), the Netherlands finally went along with the EPA system. 
It considered that the conditions that it had set were largely met in the Cotonou 
274
Agreement.
272 
The basis for this new trading regime is found Part Three, Title II (Economic and trade cooperation) of 
the Agreement. Key is furthermore Article 1 which emphasizes a region-to-region approach and 
encouragement of and support for ‘(regional) and sub-regional integration processes which foster 
integration of the ACP countries into the world economy in terms of trade and private investment’.
273 
The EU and ACP obtained a special waiver from WTO rules with other WTO members in 2001 to allow 
EPA negotiations to continue until the 31st of December 2007 when the Cotonou trade regime would 
legally expire.
274 
Details on what the Netherlands considered important can be found in e.g. Koenders (2009).

ACP regional programmes
preferences under the EU’s Generalised System of Trade Preferences’ (Busse (2010)). Several 
interim agreements were initialled with individual countries rather than full ACP regions, i.e. 
an approach that was ‘clearly at odds with one of the key objectives of the EPAs, which is to 
build on and reinforce regional integration’ (Bilal and Braun-Munziger (2008)). 
 
Negotiations have continued after 2007, but progress remained slow and only in the case of 
the Caribbean have they been closed. In the other cases they advanced only sporadically and 
were at times re-opened when issues in existing interim EPAs were identified. In fact, 
according to Mackie et al (2010b), ‘(the) EPAs have become a divisive force between Europe 
and the ACP and also between African countries’ which has weakened rather than 
strengthened the economic relationship between the two sides. That the ‘EU has yet to 
formulate any specific concessions or plans to move forward and get the negotiations out of 
the doldrums’ did little to address the ‘severe political repercussions for relations between 
the EU and the ACP, especially Africa’. 
Current state of affairs
By January 2012, interim or full EPAs existed with only 36 (including 15 small island states in 
the Caribbean) out of the 77 ACP countries. 18 of these 36 countries have taken steps 
towards ratifying these agreements, the others did not.  Most African and Pacific countries, 
| 232 | in particular the LDCs, have not concluded any agreement and the Caribbean is the only 
region that has signed a comprehensive regional EPA to date and moved on to the 
implementation phase (Table 8.3 gives an overview of the state of affairs in November 2012).  
Though this is ‘hardly conducive to strengthen regional integration’(Bilal and Braun-
Munzinger (2008)), ACP-EU trade relations are de facto governed by multiple regimes, even 
275
though this is not recognised in the 2010 revision of the Cotonou Agreement , i.e.:
•	 	an EPA, where provisionally applied – this concerns 36 ACP countries, including 10 LDCs 
and 20 non-LDCs
•	 	the Market Access Regulation advancing EU application of EPAs not yet applied – i.e. the 
interim EPAs; 
276
•	 	the Generalised System of Preferences  
•	 	the EBA arrangement – benefiting 31 ACP least developed countries and
•	 	in the case of South Africa, the Trade, Development and Co-operation Agreement
275 
Mackie et al (2010b) observe in this respect: ‘Despite the current coexistence of multiple mechanisms 
governing EU-ACP trade relations, the 2010 text merely highlights the need for the parties to ‘take all 
the necessary measures to ensure the conclusion of new WTO compatible EPAs’. It makes no mention 
of any other possibility, despite the fact that alternative schemes are being applied (such as the 
Generalised System of Preferences). Hence, ACP-EU trade relations are no longer necessarily governed 
by the Cotonou Agreement, though trade was previously a key component’.
276 
This regime applies to Nigeria, Republic of the Congo, Gabon and the Cook Islands, Federated States of 
Micronesia, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Marshall Islands and Tonga in the Pacific.

ACP regional programmes
including in terms of asymmetry, timetabling and the adjustments of safeguard measures’ and 
called ‘for this flexibility to be fully exploited in the negotiations, if that were needed and 
deemed appropriate, while guaranteeing adequate progress, to take account of the different 
needs and levels of development of ACP countries and regions..’ ((Council (2008q)).
Text Box 8.3 Main issues in unsuccessful EPA negotiations
•	 F	 rom	the	start	of	the	negotiations,	there	was	a	lack	of	common	understanding	
and approach on the new trading agreement: ‘European Commission and ACP 
countries did not share the same vision of what future EPAs may contain’ 
(European Parliament, OPPD (2011)) and most ACP countries were reluctant to 
incorporate services into the EPAs focusing on trade facilitation and technical 
support instead. ACP countries doubted whether the EPAs would indeed serve 
their interests: (i) access to European products in ACP countries could harm 
domestic producers in a range of sectors; (ii) there were few direct gains from 
exports to Europe which were mostly in the form of natural resources or 
unprocessed agricultural commodities; (iii) cutting off import tariffs on European 
products would result in considerable revenue losses – while ‘tariff revenue 
compensation with aid money was not on the cards’ (Koenders (2009)).  
•	 	The	lack	of	institutional	and	technical	capacity	on	the	ACP	side	to	conduct	
| 234 |
negotiations and coordinate member states of the regional groupings con-
cerned. Too little had been done to improve this.  Moreover, ‘(low) levels of trade 
integration and divergent economic interests .. complicated the formulation of a 
common negotiation position’ (Meyn (2008)). 
•	 	With	the	exception	of	the	EAC,	the	regional	groupings	within	which	African	
countries chose to negotiate their respective EPAs did not match the contours of 
the formally recognized regional economic communities to which they belonged. 
The situation was further compounded by the fact that these regional groupings 
include both LDCs and non-LDCs, which have different interests and with only 
the LDCs enjoying benefits under the EBA. In 2012, the Commission recognised
  that ‘(in) several instances, the reality of regional integration processes was not  
sufficiently advanced, both politically among the countries concerned a nd 
capacity-wise (European Commission (2012f)). 
•	 	ACP	countries	were	pressured	to	negotiate	on	trade-related	issues,	such	as	
investment and government procurement, in cases where there is little capacity 
or incentive at either regional or national level to enter into commitments in 
such areas. This raised the concern that the pace set by the EPA negotiations left 
little time to focus on internal factors relating to autonomous regional integra-
tion. Moreover, although the regional agenda was largely defined by the 
members of the regional bodies, some countries did not consider the implemen-
tation of the regional strategy as a national priority, which tended to delay the 
regional integration programme. Ownership of strategies by regional organisati-
ons and their members has been difficult. (Mackie et al (2010a). 

ACP regional programmes
Table 8.4 shows that excluding South Africa, total EU trade with the ACP countries has 
almost tripled between 1998 and 2011. After a dip in 2009 it has increased by some 50% to 
reach EUR 123 billion in 2011. EU imports from ACP countries have tripled as well, but 
parallel to overall trade, saw a decline in 2009 after which they increased to EUR 68 billion 
in 2011. EU experts to ACP countries have increased less strongly than imports but saw a dip 
in 2009 as well before increasing to EUR 55 billion in 2011.
Table 8.4 EU ACP trade relations (excluding South Africa) (in EUR mln)
1998 2000 2002 2005 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
EU imports from ACP 21,494 28,557 30,515 36,138 42,879 54,133 38,722 46,827 68,492
countries
EU exports to ACP 22,223 26,429 27,802 30,763 41,477 47,398 41,339 47,322 54,536
countries
Trade balance 729 -2,128 -2,713 -5,375 -1,402 -6,735 2,617 495 -13,956
Total trade 43,717 54,986 58,317 66,901 84,356 101,531 80,061 94,149 123,028
Sources: EU – Africa, Caribbean, Pacific (ACP) trade relations, Key Facts and Figures, Brussels, 2 October 2003; DG Trade, EU 
bilateral trade and trade with the world (ACP excluding South Africa, 29 November 2012
| 236 | The European trade deficit with the ACP countries that existed for nearly a decade turned 
into a trade surplus in 2009 (EUR 2.6 billion) and 2010 (EUR 495 billion). EU imports from 
ACP countries exceeded exports by close to EUR 14 billion in 2011.
For the EU, despite growth in volume, the importance of trade with the ACP group has 
remained rather marginal and despite a longstanding partnership, ‘the ACP region remains 
of more modest economic importance, accounting for very little in terms of trade’ 
(Fontagné et al (2009)). Excluding South Africa, in both 2001 and 2007, imports from ACP 
countries equalled 2.8% of all EU imports, by 2011 this was around 5%.  Vice versa, the EU 
has remained the main export market for the ACP countries, especially when excluding data 
on mineral fuels. Nevertheless, its share has seen a decline: in 2011, 23.5% of ACP exports 
went to the EU compared to 29% in 2001. Although the EU continues to maintain its 
position as Africa’s main trading partner, recent data suggest that it is ‘losing influence and 
trade advantages to other global actors, such as the emerging powers’ (Mackie et al (2010b)). 
On the other hand, it shows that ACP countries have been able to diversify their external 
trade relations, especially with China and other emerging economies’ (European 
Parliament, OPPD (2011)) as well as the United States. 
Throughout the years, only a few ACP countries have accounted for the bulk of ACP exports 
to the EU. As observed above, South Africa has been the most important trading partner 
followed by Nigeria and Angola in second and third place but at a distance, mainly 
providing mineral fuels. In 2008, South Africa, Nigeria and Angola accounted for over 60% 
of ACP exports to the EU. Other main exporters have been Cote d’Ivoire, Angola, Cameroon, 
Mauritius and Ghana. In 2008, the combined share of exports to the EU from the Caribbean 
and Pacific ACP countries was around 10%.

ACP regional programmes
observed makes the decision to increase the budget for regional programmes and to increase it further over 
the years, difficult to understand. 
Main issues that have been identified relate to: (a) the selection of regional partners, with complex and 
overlapping institutional frameworks, especially in Africa; (b) the limited institutional capacity of these 
partner institutions; (c) the fact that members of these institutions do not give priority to regional integration 
and attach more importance to building up their own institutions; (d) problematic monitoring and 
evaluation of regional programmes, and little information on progress of regional interventions, partly as a 
result of ill-defined responsibilities between Delegations and a lack of capacity at this level. 
To date, the EPAs, which have been the focus of an important part of the regional programmes, cannot be 
qualified as a success story either. Negotiations have lasted much longer than anticipated and only in the 
Caribbean is there a comprehensive regional EPA, elsewhere there are bilateral interim agreements with 
(groupings of ) individual countries. As a result, trade relations with the group of ACP countries are currently 
covered by a series of different agreements. Main issues that have transpired in the negotiations relate to: (a) 
a lack of common understanding and approach to the new trading agreement, with ACP countries doubtful 
whether the EPAs would serve their interests, (b) limited capacity on the ACP side to effectively participate in 
the negotiations, (c) the complexity of the institutional framework on the ACP side referred to above, (d) 
concerns about contentious provisions in the agreement and (e) insufficient accompanying measures to 
address supply-side constraints. For the LDCs among the ACP countries, the Everything But Arms regulation 
| 238 | has provided to a certain extent a way out of the stalemate. 
Finally, looking at ACP-EU trade volumes over the last decade, the available global trade data show that: (a) 
in terms of value these have expanded with a dip in 2009, (b) for ACP countries, the EU has remained an 
important trade partner but its share of ACP exports has declined, (c) for the EU, imports from the ACP 
countries accounted for only a minor share of total EU imports, (d) there has been little in terms of ACP export 
diversification, with the bulk still consisting of raw materials, mineral fuels (oil and gas) and most countries 
still dependent on a few commodities and (e) only very few countries, including South Africa, accounting for 
the bulk of ACP exports to the EU.

9
Interregional and  
intra-ACP cooperation

Interregional and intra-ACP cooperation
•	 	subsidiarity, i.e. action at intra-ACP level is foreseen when the action at national and/or 
regional level is not practicable or less effective. Intra-ACP cooperation is concerned 
specifically with programmes operating in all the ACP countries and global initiatives that 
benefit the majority of ACP countries
•	 	complementarity, i.e. measures taken at intra-ACP level are in synergy with operations 
carried out under other EU aid instruments. 
The Strategy Paper furthermore identifies the following three broad ‘clusters of action’: 
•	 	global initiatives in the area of health and the fight against the main poverty-related 
diseases, 
•	 	measures to protect ACP countries against exogenous shocks in the area of climate 
change and environmental pressure and to support their integration, both among 
themselves and in the world economy,  
•	 	more specific measures to support integration in Africa, by means of peace-building 
activities, institutional capacity-building for the African Union and assistance to develop 
tools and strategies to address specific common challenges, notably in the area of 
agriculture and rural development’. 
| 242 |
9.2  Funding and use of resources
th
Under the 9 EDF, the initial Intra-ACP budget was EUR 300 million, primarily covering: (1) 
social sectors (especially health and education), (2) ‘methodological support and capacity-
th
building’ and (3) natural resources management. This changed during the 9 EDF’s lifetime 
when increased funding was set aside following a series of ACP-EC Council of Ministers’ 
 
decisions. In the end, the so-called ‘Intra-ACP funds’ represented more than EUR 2.8 billion 
th
(or some 22%) of the 9 EDF, i.e. close to ten times the original allocation. This budget was 
in support of some 50 initiatives that were spread over seven sectors, including: 
•	 	health (e.g. development of malaria vaccines and the WHO Partnership on 
Pharmaceutical Policies),
•	 	education (e.g. the ACP window of Erasmus Mundi), 
•	 	environment and natural resources (e.g. Strengthening food Safety Systems in ACP 
countries, a natural disasters facility, and support for the implementation of Multilateral 
Environmental Agreements), 
•	 	peace and security and 
•	 	debt reduction. 

Interregional and intra-ACP cooperation
•	 	The use of ODA funds for non-ODA compatible funding of activities under the African  
Peace Facility.
•	 	The creation of facilities runs counter to the decision taken with Cotonou to reduce the 
number of instruments and thereby the complexity of managing EDF resources. 
th
Finally, while information on the programming of the 10 EDF Intra ACP envelope is 
available and calls for proposals are published by a series of institutions, it remains virtually 
impossible to find clear and comprehensive public information on expenditures at 
intra-ACP level or about the results that were accomplished.  This concerns to a large extent 
287
initiatives managed by the Commission directly. 
The following paragraphs provide more details on the main facilities that financed under 
the intra-ACP instrument and the EU-Africa Infrastructure Trust Fund.
9.3  The African Peace Facility 
General
The first Africa-EU Heads of State summit of April 2000 marked ‘a fresh start to the political 
dialogue outside the regular Cotonou framework’ (Elowson (2009)) in which peace and 
| 244 | security featured among the topics discussed. In 2000, the same Cotonou Agreement was 
signed, which, in Article 11, identified conflict prevention and peace building as a key area 
of cooperation. This provided the legal basis for EU funding for peace and security matters 
in Africa. It was also the year of the Joint Statement on EU Development Policy that 
identified conflict as a ‘horizontal issue’ that required ‘systematic attention’. Finally, on the 
African side, 2002 saw the establishment of the African Union (AU), amongst others with 
the task to develop a structural and long-term response to the African peace and security 
288
challenges i.e. the African Peace and Security Architecture (APSA) which was at the centre 
of the new African role on peace and security issues as well as a core priority of the African 
Partnership with the EU (Pirozzi (2011)). The APSA consists of:
287 
Some of the EU supported programmes have been evaluated, though not all. Evaluations include: (a) a 
series of evaluations of GFATM (http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/terg/evaluations/5year/), (b) 
Education Erasmus Mundus: Interim Evaluation of Erasmus Mundus, Final Report, June 2007; Ex-post 
evaluation of Erasmus Mundus Case Studies, Ex-post evaluation of Erasmus Mundus and A final report 
to DG Education and Culture (July 2009); Education for All – Fast Track Initiative mid-term evaluation 
(Cambridge Education, Mokoro, Oxford Policy Management (2010)). For the Comprehensive Africa 
Agricultural Development Programme, a monitoring and evaluation framework exists but it is unclear 
whether an evaluation was conducted. It is uncertain whether the following programmes/projects were 
externally evaluated in recent times: Mwalimu Julius Nyerere Programme, EDULINK II, Centre for the 
Development of Enterprise and Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation.
288 
The AU Constitutive Act calls for the establishment of a common defence policy and while it upholds 
the principle of non-interference ‘it also reserves the right of the Union to intervene in a Member State 
... in respect of grave circumstances, namely war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity’. It also 
articulates the inseparable link between development and security in its preamble. ‘In addition, APSA aims 
to harmonise, streamline and implement actions regarding cross-cutting and thematic peace and security 
issues such as SSR, PCRD, counter- terrorism, SALW, maritime safety and security etc.’ (Council (2011b)).

Interregional and intra-ACP cooperation
peace and security are preconditions for sustainable development – not only for Africa but also 
for Europe; (ii) and that the Africans have to take responsibility for maintaining peace on their 
continent; (iii) but that this requires that ‘substantial, predictable and flexible funding (are) 
placed at the disposal of the African Union and African sub-regional organisations in order to 
292
back their relevant operational and structural efforts’ (Council (2011b)). 
Since its establishment, the importance of the Facility and its place within the EU’s overall 
policy vis-à-vis the African continent as well as its Common Foreign and Security and European 
293
Security and Defence policies has been underlined on numerous occasions.  Likewise, the 
Netherlands has been supportive of the initiative (see Text Box 9.1) though in 2004 it was less 
happy with the idea of financing peace keeping operations with aid money (KST 74461 (2004)). 
In October 2012, the then state secretary of Foreign Affairs recognised the added value of the 
EU’s support to AMISOM and underlined that individual Member States neither had the 
capacity nor the clout the EU has in this respect (KST 21501-04-147 (2012)). A few months later, 
the newly appointed Dutch minister of foreign affairs (Frans Timmermans) underlined the 
importance of EU and Dutch support for ECOWAS in dealing with the conflict in Mali (KST 
21501-02-1203 (2012)).  
| 246 |
292 
Throughout the years, the Council continued to reconfirm the importance attached to the developing 
partnership with the African Union and sub-regional African organisations and their role in the field of 
conflict prevention, conflict management and development, the relevance of the Facility, and the EU’s 
commitment to support the peace processes in the continent. See for example Council (2004a), (2004e), 
(2005d), (2005a), (2006c), (2006s), (2007k) and (2007q) and statements made at the 3rd Africa EU summit 
that was held in Tripoli in November 2010.  
293 
Including for example Council (2004f) and (2005b)), Commission (2005j),  and (2007j)) and finally the Joint 
Africa EU Strategy of December 2007 which aims at ‘enhancing the capacity of Africa and EU to respond 
timely and adequately to security threats, and also to join efforts in addressing global challenges’ (Council 
(2007u)). The Strategy frames the African Peace Facility with peace and security among its eight partner-
ships. This partnership identifies a series of priority actions in terms of strengthened cooperation on 
conflict prevention, management and resolution, including long-term post-conflict reconstruction and 
peace building, stepping up dialogue and consultations and enhanced capacity building and cooperation in 
the fight against terrorism and on issues relating to the security/development nexus. 

Interregional and intra-ACP cooperation
2006 not ruling out funding from the CFSP budget. This issue has been on the agenda of the 
Council since October 2005 when an options paper for long-term financing of the Facility 
was discussed at the level of COREPER. History shows however that so far the option of 
using EDF resources has been retained, with the EU Member States approving a Commission 
proposal to replenish the African Peace Facility until the end of 2013 in April 2011. Using EDF 
funding is seen as a structural weakness and threat to the long-term sustainability and 
predictability of EU support, as was also, be it indirectly, recognised by the Commission in 
296
2003 (Commission (2003h). At the same time, the idea of also using ENPI to contribute to 
the Facility has not materialized ‘because the idea met with resistance on both the European 
and the African sides, where officials responsible for administering the ENP funds and 
approving their use are not convinced that pan-African projects were the best use of the 
297
ENPI’. The importance of continued funding of the ASPA is reinforced by the fact that the 
AU remains dependent upon the EU’s contribution, one reason being that a number of AU 
member states ‘have difficulties in honouring their financial obligations’ (Pirozzi (2011)) 
towards the funding of the PSOs and other operational activities. 
Facility characteristics
In March 2004, the EU Member States approved a Commission proposal to establish a  
 
EUR 250 million Africa Peace Facility . These EUR 250 million were scraped together from the 
| 248 | allocations of individual ACP countries (EUR 126.4 million) and unallocated resources of the 
long-term development envelope of the 9th EDF (EUR 123.6 million). In terms of objectives, 
the general objective of the Facility reads as  ‘to contribute to peace, stability and security in 
Africa through targeted support to African efforts at the continental and regional level in 
the area of conflict prevention, management and resolution, and peace building’ (Council 
(2008j)). Its specific objectives are in summary: (i) enhanced dialogue on challenges to 
peace and security; (ii) operationalisation of the African Peace and Security Architecture; 
and (iii) predictable funding for Africa-led peace support operations, in particular through 
the establishment of an EU predictable and sustainable funding scheme (Council (2008j)). 
The first agreements related to the Facility were signed in July and September 2004 and 
296 
 See Poultron et al (2011), Furness (2011), and Vanheusden (2011). Several options have been suggested 
to address future funding by for example Furness (2011), ECPDM (2006) and Ecorys (2006). According to 
Koeb (2008), ‘(more) coherent external action could provide other options for supporting PSOs than the 
current main EU instrument for this task, the African Peace Facility (APF). If the EU is serious about 
human security in Africa, as well as strengthening its own security threatened by conflict and lack of rule 
of law in Africa, it will not only have to apply the entire range of external action instruments and 
policies to the problem, but also allocate adequate funds to it’.
297 
On this issue see also ECDPM (2006) and Assanvo and Pout (2007), observing that ‘Inadequate funding 
has always been one of the main factor undermining past and current African commitments to 
maintain peace and security on the continent’. According to the Commission in 2011, ‘In general, 
coherence and coordination with other EDF funded activities and EU instruments and initiatives (IfS, 
DCI, ENPI, CSDP...), as well as with bilateral actions of EU Member States, should be strengthened’ 
(Council (2011b)).) The document talks about further strengthening of inter-service EC cooperation ‘in 
view of reinforcing coherence and consistency of support provided under the APF and other EDF 
funding sources (i.e. RIPs), the IfS, and the ENPI and DCI if relevant’. 

Interregional and intra-ACP cooperation
302303
Table 9.2 APF financial overview (in EUR  mln)
Table 9.2 APF financial overview (in EUR  mln)
Budget Contracted Paid
th
PSO 400 (9 EDF) African Union Mission in Darfur, Sudan (AMIS), 
th
200 (10 EDF) ‘re-hatted’ into joint AU/UN African Peace 302.8 262.5
302 
Facility 
The Force multinational en Centrafrique 68.5 61
(FOMUC) in the Central African Republic of the 
Communauté économique et monétaire de 
l’Afrique Centrale (CEMAC) followed (since July 
2008) by the Mission for the consolidation of 
peace in Central African Republic (MICOPAX) 
under the responsibility of the Economic 
Community of Central African States
African Union mission in the Comoros 8.5 4
(AMISEC/MAES)
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) 142.5 100.7
th
Capacity 27 (9 EDF) AU Commission 6 4.7
th
building 65 (10 EDF) ASF workshops AU/REC/ASF brigades 1 0.7
AU Commission –Peace and Security 20 13.7
303
Department 10 2.5
| 250 |
th
ERM 15 (10 EDF) 15 3
Total €707 574.3 452.8
Capacity building has been in support of the ASPA and focused on inter alia the Peace and 
Security Department of the AU Commission, the African conflict prevention capacities, the 
planning and management capacities of the AU Commission as well as the African Standby 
Force. Moreover, through the capacity building programme, the Facility financed liaison 
offices to the African Union in Addis Ababa. A Joint Financing Arrangement (JFA) was 
launched on 1 July 2010 ‘to ensure a more harmonised and predictable funding of human 
resources related to the implementation of the Peace and Security Department Programme 
of the AUC Strategic Plan’ regulating an EC contribution of EUR 10 million for 2.5 years 
(Commission (2011u)). This allows for a more coordinated and continuous support to 
staffing replacing project based funding by multiple donors like the EU (Pirozzi and Miranda 
(2010). At the same time, since 2007 some EUR 61 million has been committed as aid to the 
302 
Eight EU Member States have contributed an additional EUR 36.5 million since 2004. According to 
Vetter (2006), ‘EU support to AMIS became an important occasion where the EU’s development and 
crisis management instruments and the support provided by individual Member States complemented 
each other’ while the ‘collective efforts developed and agreed in the Political and Security Committee 
helped to further shape the EU’s role as a key partner for the AU’.
303 
Since 2012, the Netherlands contributes some EUR 1million to the AU’s Peace and Security Department 
for a period of three years (KST 33480-V-3 (2012)).

Interregional and intra-ACP cooperation
306 
(Poultron et al (2011)). The Thematic Evaluation of European Commission Support to Conflict 
Prevention and Peace-building of October 2011 (focusing on the Central African Republic) 
reports that ‘FOMUC and MICOPAX, financed through the African Peace Facility, had a 
stabilising effect on certain parts of the country, notably by creating security conditions 
under which the population could conduct social and economic activities’ (ADE (2011)). At 
the same time, it was doubtful about the lack of capacity of national or local authorities and 
the financial resources of CAR’s Conseil National de Médiation to take over interventions. 
Moreover, ‘the durability of the effects of the FOMUC/MICOPAX was in doubt in the absence 
of further Commission support’ (ADE (2011)).
307
Implementation issues identified include the following : 
•	 	The use of the capacity building fund was affected by (i) a limited absorption capacity at 
308
the level of the AUC and the RECs and (ii) the need to take into account the political 
realities of African integration which require the AU to balance interests and visions of 
African states, RECs and international partners.
•	 	A lack of coordination, on both the African and the European side, with AU member 
states not always having the resources to ensure their participation in the Peace and 
Security Council, and among the various European actors, with ‘often diverging priorities’ 
309
| 252 | and different and at times overlapping interventions (Pirozzi and Miranda (2010)).
•	 	A lack of administrative capacity on the African side (affecting reporting and financial 
management (Council (2011b)) while EDF rules were sometimes criticised for being 
306 
The report states, for example, that ‘(the) APF is considered successful by most stakeholders, 
particularly in funding PSOs and establishing the AU as a serious player in peace and security issues. Its 
action is rooted in repeated joint commitments by EU and AU to work together for peace in Africa, ... 
The APF has given the African Union political clout, with a physical and political presence in peacekeep-
ing that could not have been imagined ten years ago. The AU is now a functioning organisation with 
major military operations, some additional experience in police and civilian peacekeeping and 
mediation, and significant budgetary experience’. The APF is an instrument that ‘provides political 
leverage to the AU’ and, (‘in) a remarkably short period, .. has changed the face of peace and security in 
Africa’.  
307 
Mackie et al (2012) state in this respect: ‘The APSA’s autonomy continues to be curtailed by practical 
constraints including lack of capacity, limited technical expertise, unpredictable and unsustainable 
funding by AU members, and lack of coordination and cooperation’. They underline that the ‘problems 
are fundamentally political’ and that ‘the linkages between the AU and the RECs remain a source of 
tension’ which has been reinforced by incoherence on the EU side, for example, in Guinea and the 
Sahel, when attempts were made to integrate security strategy concerns in the development agenda’. 
308 
Likewise Pirozzi (2011) observed that while EUR 34.5 million was allocated to capacity-building under 
the 9th EDF, ‘slightly more than a half’ of the contracted funds was actually paid, ‘due to the AU’s 
difficulties in recruiting personnel and implementing related projects’.
309 
See also Klingebiel et al (2008), stating that ‘(donors) use a range of instruments and modes of delivery 
in support of the APSA, according to their national interests and internal peculiarities. Consequently, 
there is a great need for the coordination and harmonisation of their efforts’. 

Interregional and intra-ACP cooperation
As a co-financing instrument (providing a maximum contribution of 75% of total project 
costs), the Facility, was to be ‘a catalyst promoting initiatives, providing information, acting 
as a clearing-house, building research and management capacity in ACP countries and, on 
the other hand, an instrument which can provide the missing link in financing sustainable 
projects and activities’ (Commission (2004g)). Its long-term overall goal is ‘to contribute to 
the achievement of the (MDGs), in particular the goal on poverty reduction, through 
312
increased access to energy services by the poor rural population’. 
The Facility was financed from the 9th EDF, i.e. EUR 220 million for the period 2006 – 2009. 
Already in 2007, the Council called upon the Commission and the EU Member States to 
‘enhance support for the energy sector in Africa’, amongst others by replenishing the 
ACP-EU Energy Facility’ (Council (2007h)). The Africa-EU Energy Partnership was presented 
in October 2007 and endorsed at the Lisbon summit of December 2007. Continuation of the 
Facility under the 10th EDF (EUR 200 million for 2009 – 2013) was initiated in October 2009 
in Stockholm. The Council welcomed continuation and called ‘on Member States to 
313
participate through co-financing’ (Council (2009a)). 
The Facility’s implementation modalities are shown in Table 9.3. According to the 
Commission in 2010, the projects funded under the Facility were expected to reach 6.5 
| 254 | million final beneficiaries  (Commission (2010u)).  
312 
This was in line with the EU Energy Initiative for Poverty Eradication and Sustainable Development 
announced by the Commission in 2003, as a demonstration of ‘the commitment of the EU to 
supporting those parts of the WSSD Plan of Implementation which highlight the importance of 
improving the provision of adequate, affordable, sustainable energy services. Such improvements in 
energy services for the poor are a necessary condition for the achievement of the Millennium 
Development Goals’ (Commission (2003h)).  
313 
According to the Council, ‘(the) new Energy Facility will contribute to reduce poverty and improve 
livelihoods through the support to innovative projects aiming at increased access to modern energy 
services in rural, isolated and peri-urban areas in ACP countries. It will focus on renewable energies, will 
work with decentralised actors and the private sector and will be anchored in ACP partner countries’ 
strategies and priorities’ (Council (2009c)).

Interregional and intra-ACP cooperation
th
With the above Council Decision an amount of EUR 500 million was set aside under the 9 
EDF. The aim was ‘to significantly increase funding to achieve the targets on access to water 
and sanitation for the poor in ACP countries, and to use development aid as a catalyst to 
leverage additional financial resources’ (Commission (2004a)). This contribution was to 
support the ACP countries to arrive at ‘road maps’ to achieve the water and sanitation 
related MDG in each country (Commission (2005i)).
The Facility was to support development and reform of the relevant sector policies and 
provide flexible and innovative methods of financing for water supply and sanitation 
projects and programmes. It was considered as ‘part of the response to the objectives and 
priorities’ of the EU Water Initiative that was launched in 2002 (Commission (2006i)). 
According to the Commission in 2009, ‘(about) 14.5 million people are expected to directly 
benefit from access to safe water. Of these, some 3.5 million will also benefit from access to 
improved sanitation and 10.5 million from hygiene education programmes’ (Commission 
317
(2009m)). 
In terms of funding, a first allocation of EUR 250 million was scraped together from the 
th th
reserve of the 9 EDF long-term development envelope (EUR 185 million) and the 9 EDF 
 
Investment Facility (EUR 41 million) plus EUR 24 million from the intra-ACP allocation. For 
| 256 | the remainder, EUR 185 million were to come from the envelope for support for long-term 
development, EUR 24 million from the envelope for regional cooperation integration and 
EUR 41 million from the Investment Facility.
The Netherlands, was in principle in favour of this second allocation of EUR 250 million for 
the Water Facility but wanted additional information on the allocation and use of the first 
tranche; it also questioned the ability of the ACP countries to absorb EUR 500 million in a 
short period of time. 
th
EU and ACP countries agreed to continue the Water Facility under the 10 EDF with a total 
budget of EUR 200 million. Funds were to be allocated on the basis of three calls for 
318
proposals (EUR 166 million ) and EUR 40 million for a pooling mechanism to co-finance 
medium-sized water and sanitation infrastructure projects with other donors. 
In terms of utilisation of resources, the biggest part of the First Water Facility’s budget (EUR 
415 million), was channelled to 175 projects selected through two calls for proposals 
(November 2004 and March 2006). These calls covered the areas of improving water 
317 
Based on the ‘Mid-term Review Analysis of the Water Facility and Energy Facility (Gruppo Soges (2007)), 
a communication of EuropeAid’s Water and Energy Facilities Unit of November 2007 refers to better 
access to water for close to 20 million people, with 12 million having better access to sanitation and 
more that 13 million provided with education of health and hygiene. However, these figures are based 
on the numbers ‘declared by the applicants in their proposals’ for the first two calls for proposals.
318 
EUR 129 million were set aside for ‘Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion for the Millennium 
Development Goals’, EUR 23 million for ‘Partnerships for Capacity Development in the ACP Water and 
Sanitation Sector’ and EUR 14 million for ‘Promotion of the Millennium Development goals: Sanitation 
in poor peri-urban and urban areas in ACP countries’. 

Interregional and intra-ACP cooperation
Table 9.4 Projects funded under the 2nd Water Facility (2010 and 2011)
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Partnerships for Capacity 
Promotion for the MDGs Development in the ACP Water 
and Sanitation Sector
Namibia 1 1
Niger 4
Rwanda 1 2
Senegal 1
Solomon islands 1
Somalia 2
St Lucia 1
Suriname 2
Tanzania 3 2
Timor Leste 3
Togo 4
Uganda 2 2
Zimbabwe 4
| 258 |
More than one country 3
EU-Africa Infrastructure Trust Fund 
In February 2006, the European Commission and the EIB signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding to promote the Africa Partnership for Infrastructure and to establish the 
EU-Africa Infrastructure Trust Fund. The Council welcomed the initiative underlining ‘the 
importance for the Trust Fund to associate all interested Member States’ and stressing ‘the 
possibility of joint financing and co-financing infrastructure projects supported by the Trust 
320
Fund’ (Council (2006q)). The Netherlands expressed itself in favour of the Trust Fund as 
well; it expected added value from more coordination as regards infrastructure investments, 
agreed to the coordinating role of the Commission and considered that poverty reduction, 
economic development and private sector development would benefit from improved 
infrastructure. It also saw the initiative as a possibility for the Dutch private sector to better 
position itself in Africa and appreciated the legal set-up: a trust fund with its own mandate 
that is run at arms-length away from day-to-day European politics. The Netherlands stressed 
the importance of alignment with existing EU initiatives and those of others (World Bank, 
African Development Bank and UN), together with the issue of (ecological) sustainability. 
320 
In its Conclusions, the Council amongst others emphasized the importance of: (i) establishing 
sustainability criteria for selection of projects and to ensure application of environmental and social 
impacts assessment’, (ii) special attention for ‘good governance, accountability and anti-corruption 
issues’, (iii) ‘the importance of capacity building and development of related services, markets and 
regulatory frameworks to sustain the benefits the investments deliver’, (iv) the need for complementa-
rity ‘to the Infrastructure Consortium for Africa’ and (v) that funding should supplement ‘the EU’s 
sectoral approach and support to infrastructure at national and local levels’. 

Interregional and intra-ACP cooperation
should include support to regional infrastructure including the closing of infrastructure 
missing links, as well as broadening the terms of reference to cover national infrastructure 
with a regional dimension (Council (2009a)). The Council again invited the Member States 
to consider contributing to the Trust Fund. As regard these contributions, over the years, 
Finland, Portugal and the UK have joined the Agreement of 2006. Contributions to the Trust 
Fund have increased from EUR 42.5 million by the end of 2007 to EUR 290.2 million by the 
end of 2010. Biggest contributors are the Commission (72%) and, followed at a distance, the 
UK (13%); other EU Member States, including the Netherlands, appear to be dragging their 
feet. The Netherlands did not provide additional funding after its initial payment of EUR 2 
million in 2007 (less than 1% of all contributions by the end of 2010). 
In the period 2007-2010, 34 projects were approved with a total value of some EUR 205 
million (see Annex 4 (Table A.4.10)).  In two cases projects concerned direct project funding, 
in 9 cases interest rate subsidies. The remainder concerned the financing of technical 
assistance. 18 projects were in the field of energy, 5 in ICT, 8 in transport, 2 in water and one 
multi-sectoral project.  Disbursement totalled some EUR 1.1 million in 2008, EUR 22.4 
million in 2009 and EUR 8.4 million in 2010. 
According to the EIB, total commitments under the Trust Fund in the period 2007-2010 (EUR 
| 260 | 174 million) will be matched by an estimated EUR 1.3 billion from the PFG and EUR 963 
million from other sources, indicating a ‘considerable leverage effect’. This leverage effect is 
confirmed in the mid-term evaluation report (Ernst & Young (2012)). At the same time, little 
information is available about results with the mid-term evaluation stating that the Fund is 
‘at an early stage in terms of physical progress of infrastructure projects, and as such 
measuring expected outcomes and impacts of projects (and even more so from the 
(Infrastructure Trust Fund) as a whole) is not possible’ (Ernst & Young (2012)).  

Annexes

Annexes
extended its partnerships with similar departments in other countries, for instance through 
joint evaluations and evaluative activities undertaken under the auspices of the OECD-DAC 
Network on Development Evaluation.
IOB has continuously expanded its methodological repertoire. More emphasis is now given 
to robust impact evaluations implemented through an approach in which both quantitative 
and qualitative methods are applied. IOB also undertakes policy reviews as a type of 
evaluation. Finally, it conducts systematic reviews of available evaluative and research 
material relating to priority policy areas.
| 264 |

Annexes
Approach
The prescribed components for a policy evaluation are:
•	 	Description and analysis of the problem that led to the policy
•	 Description and motivation of the role of the government in this area	
•	 	Description of the policy objectives
•	 	Description of the employed instruments and analysis of the outcomes thereof
•	 	Description of budgets and expenditures.
Description and analysis of the problem that informed the policy measure
The policy evaluation will analyse the raison d’être for and purpose of developing and 
implementing development cooperation policies at the EU level, and whether these are still 
valid. 
Description and motivation of the role of the Dutch government
The evaluation will describe the roles of the different Dutch institutions in EU and EDF 
development cooperation policy making, with a focus on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It 
will analyse how the Netherlands has motivated the importance of this cooperation.  
Description of the policy objectives
| 266 | The policy evaluation will analyse what the Dutch priorities and objectives have been 
vis-à-vis EU aid in general and the EDF in particular. It will also analyse the extent to which 
Dutch bilateral aid policies have been congruent with those pursued by the Commission. 
The evaluation will also include a description and analysis of the EU aid policies that were 
put into place in the period 2000-2010. It will examine whether the Member States, 
focusing on the Netherlands, have played a role in their design, and if so, which. The 
evaluation will also deal with the strategies and instruments that the Netherlands has used 
to contribute to the design of EU and EDF development cooperation policies and the 
challenges it has faced in this respect. It will also identify whether there have been specific 
cases where the Netherlands have made a specific effort to influence EU aid policies and 
(country) strategies and the use of specific aid modalities and the question whether EU 
expansion and EU institutional change have impact on its ability to exert influence.  
Description of the employed instruments and analysis of the outcomes thereof
Under this heading the policy evaluation will first of all provide information on the 
different approaches (i.e. project approach, the sector approach, and the macro or global 
approach), financing modalities (EU procurement and grant award procedures, common 
pool funds, and budget support) and channels that have been used to implement the EDF 
and the rationale for the choices made in this respect. It will analyse what activities were 
undertaken and whether efficient has been use made of the funding available. Attention 
will also be paid to the arrangements for monitoring and evaluation and quality assurance 
and the results thereof. Focusing on the above-mentioned countries, the evaluation will 
provide information on the main results and (net) outcomes of EU aid interventions in key 
sectors and how these are assessed in the light of Dutch aid priorities.  The evaluation will 
also deal with the question to what extent it can be established whether EU policies in other 
areas than aid (i.e. trade, agriculture, security, human rights and migration) and regional EU 

Annexes
Annex 3 Respondents
Netherlands and Netherlands institutions and organisations
Beuzekom, A. van Policy officer DEC, Policy Coherence, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Blokker, N. Desk officer Uganda, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Buisman, L.  Policy officer DEC, Quality of aid, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Cornelissen, S. Evert Vermeer Stichting
Dijk, R. van Permanent Representation of the Netherlands to the EU, charged 
with the ACP Working Group, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Genee, O.  Strategic Policy Advisor DEC; Head of Policy Coherence Unit 
(2002-2008), Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Gonggrijp, M.  Vice-head DEC, Budget support, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Haspels, A.  Head DIE/EX (2000-2005), Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Keijzer, N. ECDPM
Klaasen, D.  Policy officer DIE/EX, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Kleiweg de Zwaan, P.J Head DIE/EX, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Klugkist, J. Former deputy head DIE/EX, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
| 268 |
Libon, W. Ministry of General Affairs, Advisor to the cabinet of the Prime 
Minister ; Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Permanent Representation of 
the Netherlands to the EU, charged with the ACP Working Group 
(2003-2008)
Logt, P. van de Policy officer DIE/EX (2009-2011), Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Oskam, E.  Policy officer Directorate General for Foreign Economic Relations, 
Ministry of Economic Affairs
Peters, T. Permanent Representation of the Netherlands to the EU, charged 
with the Working Party on Development Cooperation and Africa 
Working Group
Reynders, M.  Policy officer DIE/EX, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Rijn, J. van  Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Policy officer DEC, Policy Coherence, 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Rinzema, J. Policy officer DEC, Budget support, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Schaik, L. van  Institute Clingendael, Research fellow
Seters, J. van Policy officer, Development policy and international relations, 
ECDPM
Sherriff, A. Senior executive International Relations, ECDPM
Spitz, R.  Policy coordinator Department Consular Affairs and Migration, 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Toth, I.  Cordaid
Veen, M. van  Department Migration Policy, Ministry of Interior
Wall Bake, J. W. van den  Foreign Financial Relations Department, Administrator (‘bewind-
voerder’) EIB, Ministry of Finance 

Annexes
Gallagher, L. Chargée de Programmes Section Economie et Secteurs Sociaux, 
Délégation de l’Union européenne au Burkina Faso
Hebie, A. Chargé de Programmes Développement Rural, Sécurite Alimentaire et 
Environnement, Délégation de l’Union européenne au Burkina Faso
Honliasso , A. Directeur de la Coopération UEMOA
Hoorntje, T. Chef de Coopération, Délégation de l’Union européenne au Burkina 
Faso
Joseph, A. Chargée de programmes Secteur MDG Contracts infrastructures Sec-
tion, Délégation de l’Union européenne au Burkina Faso
Kalwoule, J.N. CREDO
Konombo, M. SOS Sahel Int.BF
Lonfo, C. ODE-BURKINA
Millogo, A. Chargé de programmes Budget support , Délégation de l’Union 
européenne au Burkina Faso
Neck, A. Van Chargée de Programmes Décentralisation Secteurs l’Economie et 
Sociaux, Délégation de l’Union européenne au Burkina Faso
Neu, S. KFW, Director
Ouedraogo, F.G. Assistant du Chef de Coopération, Délégation de l’Union euro-
| 270 |
péenne au Burkina Faso
Oueraobo T. O. A.E.A.D.
Ouibga, Y. H. Directeur Général, ONEA / MAH
Ouoba, G. Directeur technique
Pegidis, E. Premier Secrétaire Chef de Section Intégration Régionale, Secteur 
Privé, Culture, Délégation de l’Union européenne au Burkina Faso
Razafinative, E. Equilibres & Populations
Sanou Seguedan, I.I. Chef de Service de Promotion de Programmes UE/FED/BEI, 
Régisseur du Projet d’Appui à l’ON
Segbo, M.L. Directeur Général de la Coopération, Ministère de l’Economie et des 
Finances
Sonda, S. INADES-Formato
Speelman, J.J.   Chef de Coopération / Premier Conseiller, Ambassade du Royaume 
des Pays-Bas
Tawiah, U.N. Ulla Ambassade de Danemark, Chef de Coopération
Tiemtore, S. Coordonnateur du Secrétariat permanent des ONG (SPONG) 
Tientore, S. SPONG
Trachant, P. AFD, Director
Traore, N. H. Premier Président de la Cour des Comptes
Valleur, S. Ambassade de France, Attaché de Coopération
Vebamba, D. Secrétaire Permanent du Conseil national de la Statistique

Annexes
Kamanzi, J. Ministry of Infrastructure, Permanent Secretary
Kigabo, D. DFID, Economist (through e-mail)
Kironde, V. Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Expert in charge of Northern Europe, 
Europe and Americas Unit
Kubach, T.M. EU Delegation to Rwanda, Attaché Rural Development
Kyakweli, J-M. DFID, Agriculture & Livelihoods Adviser (through e-mail)
Makken, F. Netherlands Embassy, ambassador
Nicolai, F. Netherlands Embassy, First Secretary Governance, Justice & Law
Nkusi, R. Ministry of Finance, Director for External Financing, Mobilization 
and Coordination 
Oppewal, J. Netherlands Embassy, Head of Cooperation
Rurangwa, R. Ministry of Agriculture, DG Planning
Sayinzoga, K. Ministry of Finance, Permanent Secretary and EDF National 
Authorizing Officer
Smiet, F. Netherlands Embassy, First Secretary Regional Affairs
Teccarelli, D, EU Delegation to Rwanda, Attaché Economy & Governance
Tillessen, A. EU Delegation to Rwanda, Counsellor Economic & Governance
| 272 |
Tzartzas, I. EU Delegation to Rwanda, Head of Section - Infrastructure
Waveren, E. van SNV NL Development Organisation, Acting Country Director
Whetham, C. DFID Rwanda, Deputy Head
Zurdo, D. EU Delegation to Rwanda, Head of Section - Rural Development
Uganda
Deus, M. Assistant Commissioner - Agribusiness, Ministry of Agriculture, 
Animal Industry & Fisheries
Ferrero, A. Northern Uganda Operations officer, EU Delegation
Ficcarelli, G. First Counselor, Head of Operational Section, EU Delegation
Geraedts, M. Deputy Head of Mission/Head of development cooperation, Royal 
Netherlands Embassy 
Iranya, J. Project Manager, World Vision
Johannsen, A. Head of development cooperation, Embassy of Germany
Kwamya, W. Team leader, Growth and Poverty Reduction Programme, United 
Nations Development Programme
Larsen, H. Deputy Head of Mission, Royal Danish embassy/DANIDA
Leenstra, M., Royal Netherlands Embassy
Luyimbazi, D. Director Planning, Uganda National Roads Authority
Makanga, C. Coordinator, National Authorising Officer Support Unit
Makoha, J. Country representative AVSI, NGO

Annexes
Annex 4 EDF Data
Table A.4.1 Contributions of Member States to the EDF, 2002-2010 (EUR mln)
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
Austria 53 53 56 56 59 59 62 62 67 67 41 29 70 78 78 87 87 93 624 531
Belgium 78 78 83 83 87 87 91 91 98 98 60 43 1 105 116 116 129 129 137 923 788
Denmark 43 43 45 45 47 47 50 50 54 54 33 23 57 64 64 71 71 75 505 430
| 274 |
Finland 30 30 31 31 33 33 34 34 37 37 23 16 39 44 44 49 49 52 349 297
France 486 486 515 434 538 577 566 595 610 610 375 266 10 652 719 719 802 802 851 5,729 4,875
Germany 467 467 495 495 517 517 544 544 586 586 361 255 25 642 692 692 771 771 818 5,508 4,715
Greece 25 25 27 27 28 28 29 29 31 31 19 14 1 34 37 37 41 41 44 294 251
Ireland 12 12 13 13 14 14 14 14 16 16 10 6 2 18 19 19 20 20 22 146 127
Italy 251 251 266 266 278 278 292 292 315 315 194 137 331 371 365 414 414 439 2,957 2,512
Luxemburg 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 4 3 0 8 8 8 10 10 10 68 59
Netherlands 104 104 111 111 116 116 122 122 131 131 80 57 138 154 154 172 172 183 1,230 1,047
Portugal 19 19 21 16 21 26 23 23 24 24 15 10 26 29 29 32 28 34 229 191
Spain 117 117 124 124 129 129 136 136 147 147 90 64 154 173 173 193 193 204 1,377 1,173
Sweden 55 55 58 47 60 71 64 64 69 69 42 30 72 80 80 90 90 96 643 547
UK 254 254 269 269 281 461 296 296 319 319 197 138 335 376 376 419 419 444 2,992 2,729
EIB 8th EDF  100 100 20 20   0   120 120
EIB 9th EDF 0 0 105 105    40 46  145 151
Total 2,000 2,000 2,120 2,024 2,420 2,654 2,350 2,379 2,510 2,510 1,545 1,095 39 2,679 3,000 3,000 3,300 3,296 3,502 23,842 20,543
Sources: Commission (2004h), (2006o), (2007l), (2008g), (2009k), (2010p) and (2011f).
Contributions called up in 2002
Contributions received in 2002
Called upon in 2003
Received in 2003
Called upon in 2004
Received in 2004
Called upon in 2005
Received in 2005
Called upon in 2006
Received in 2006
Called upon in 2007 (8th EDF)
Called upon in 2007 (9th EDF)
Voluntary constribution 2007
Received in 2007
Called upon in 2008
Received in 2008
Called up in 2009
Received in 2009
Called up in 2010
Contributions called up 
2002-2010
Contributions received 
2002-2009

Annexes
Table A.4.2 ACP country level statistics 8th-10th EDF (end 2011)
Decisions Assigned funds Payments
Coto- Coto- Coto-
Lome nou Total Lome nou Total Lome nou Total
Angola 124 236 360 116 174 290 109 132 241
Benin 172 620 792 172 529 701 172 435 607
Botswana 33 175 209 33 165 198 33 127 159
Burkina Faso 288 1,001 1,289 286 880 1,165 283 667 950
Burundi 133 458 591 132 385 518 129 338 468
Cameroon 234 414 648 233 321 554 232 207 440
Cape Verde 57 94 151 56 89 144 55 76 131
Central African Republic 85 265 350 84 174 258 84 140 224
Chad 217 475 692 215 297 511 212 227 439
Comoros 16 77 94 16 54 70 16 40 56
Congo (Brazzaville) 30 169 200 29 136 165 27 127 154
Djibouti 27 59 87 27 44 71 27 27 53
DRC 107 1,145 1,252 103 802 904 101 674 776
Equatorial Guinea 4 9 13 4 9 13 4 6 10
| 276 |
Eritrea 18 144 162 18 94 112 18 81 99
Ethiopia 367 1,093 1,460 363 932 1,295 339 819 1,158
Gabon 77 104 182 77 68 145 77 52 129
Gambia 33 105 139 32 85 117 32 65 97
Ghana 219 690 909 219 634 853 219 441 660
Guinea Bissau 47 151 198 47 129 176 46 109 156
Guinea (Conakry) 167 155 322 153 128 281 143 111 255
Ivory Coast 160 461 621 158 277 435 156 228 384
Kenya 199 582 781 191 363 553 188 252 440
Lesotho 67 260 326 65 150 215 65 132 197
Liberia 25 269 294 25 250 275 24 181 205
Madagascar 274 477 752 274 449 723 274 437 712
Malawi 267 639 906 264 522 787 262 402 665
Mali 323 923 1,246 321 836 1,157 321 602 923
Mauritania 135 274 409 134 183 316 134 151 284
Mauritius 55 130 185 55 113 169 41 109 150
Mozambique 410 1,096 1,505 408 1,043 1,450 405 754 1,158
Namibia 72 174 246 72 160 232 72 106 177
Niger 153 780 933 151 638 789 151 480 632
Nigeria 125 1,042 1,166 114 443 558 105 387 492
Rwanda 178 502 680 178 481 659 178 360 538
Sao Tome & Principe 12 32 45 12 18 30 12 16 28

Annexes
Table A.4.2 ACP country level statistics 8th-10th EDF (end 2011)
Decisions Assigned funds Payments
Coto- Coto- Coto-
Lome nou Total Lome nou Total Lome nou Total
Palau 0 5 5 0 5 5 0 3 3
Papua New Guinea 58 186 244 55 143 198 54 114 168
Solomon Islands 91 50 141 91 38 129 91 29 119
Tonga 6 14 20 5 14 19 5 12 18
Tuvalu 3 11 14 3 10 12 2 8 10
Vanuatu 16 34 50 16 26 42 16 23 38
Wester Samoa 19 56 75 19 53 72 19 45 64
Total Pacific 223 513 736 219 414 633 217 307 524
Caribbean region 62 273 335 60 168 228 54 140 194
Central Africa region 77 79 156 77 72 149 77 60 137
Central Africa region 130 130 25 25 0 7 7
East Africa region 164 164 162 162 159 0 159
Eastern, Southern Africa and 
Indian Ocean 532 532 443 443 0 310 310
| 278 |
Indian Ocean region 11 11 11 11 11 11
Intra ACP allocations 724 2,162 2,886 697 1,450 2,147 669 853 1,522
Multi-regional PALOP 11 33 44 10 28 39 10 16 27
Pacific region 33 94 127 33 90 123 33 52 84
Regional cooperation ACP 75 3,028 3,103 60 2,921 2,981 52 2,410 2,462
Southern Africa region 58 58 57 57 57 57
Southern Africa region 166 129 94
West Africa region 231 313 545 228 274 502 224 165 389
Total regional cooperation ACP 1,445 6,811 8,256 1,396 5,601 6,997 1,346 4,106 5,452
Administrative and financial 
expenditure 36 892 927 36 721 757 35 693 729
All ACP countries 1,177 169 1,346 1,172 159 1,331 1,172 154 1,326
Total ACP 10,658 29,736 40,394 10,503 23,981 34,484 10,313 18,603 28,917
Total OCT 51 382 433 49 300 349 49 241 291
Total ACP + OCT 10,709 30,118 40,827 10,552 24,281 34,833 10,363 18,845 29,207
 LDC
 Other low income (per capita GNI < $935 in 2007)
 Lower middle income (per capita GNI $936-$3 705 in 2007)
Upper middle income (or not classified) (per capita GNI $ 3706-11455 in 2007)
Source: Commission (2012b)

Annexes
| 280 |
Table A.4.3 Details of EDF sectoral commitments (2003-2011) and disbursements (2009-2011) (EUR  mln)
Commitments Disbursements
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Total % 2009 2010 2011 Total %
Business and other services 68 28 57 0 23 23 32 70 23 324 1.0% 17 46 51 114 1.0%
Sub-total 918 75 888 933 751 1,167 870 546 560 6,708 20.1% 569 673 740 1,982 18.2%
Production sector
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 133 123 89 202 282 200 316 342 340 2,027 6.1% 315 257 242 814 7.5%
Agriculture 106 111 83 189 235 176 268 342 299 1,809 5.4% 293 223 196 712 6.5%
Forestry 2 9 3 8 10 24 10 36 102 0.3% 13 10 18 41 0.4%
Fishing 25 3 3 5 37 38 5 116 0.3% 9 24 28 61 0.6%
Industry, mining and construction 53 66 56 26 80 4 41 8 52 387 1.2% 104 81 64 249 2.3%
Industry 12 34 41 26 80 4 36 8 52 292 0.9% 74 58 51 183 1.7%
Minieral resources and mining 42 33 15 5 94 0.3% 29 21 12 62 0.6%
Construction 0 0 0 1 2 1 4 0.0%
Trade and tourism 59 37 70 208 152 26 168 85 247 1,052 3.2% 105 127 112 344 3.2%
Trade; Trade policy and regulation 53 37 67 197 137 26 168 85 247 1,017 3.1% 103 116 105 324 3.0%
Tourism 7 3 11 15 36 0.1% 2 11 7 20 0.2%
Sub-total 246 227 215 436 514 230 525 435 639 3,467 10.4% 524 465 418 1,407 12.9%
Multi-sector/cross cutting
General environmental protection 25 9 93 53 55 54 80 147 89 605 1.8% 53 65 69 187 1.7%
Women in development 0 0 2 2 0.0%
Other multi-sector 66 177 110 249 279 50 379 140 393 1,843 5.5% 164 221 138 523 4.8%
Sub-total 91 186 203 304 334 104 459 287 482 2,450 7.4% 217 286 207 710 6.5%

Annexes
323
Table A.4.4 EDF general budget support commitments per country, 2002-2010 (in EUR mln)
 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Total
Benin 55  18 18 51 26 13 181
Burkina Faso 125 152 21 320 5 23 646
Burundi 23 44 8 31 48 21 14 188
Cape Verde  6 13 3 16 9 47
Central African 4 4 14 17 12 13 64
Republic
Chad 50       50
Comoros 0 7 7
Cote d’Ivoire 40    0   40
Congo Republic   31     31
DRC 6 106 23 50 184
Ethiopia 44 95  0   139
Ghana 5 62 49 175 41 9 341
Guinea Bissau 6 12 18 15 51
Kenya  125      125
| 282 |
Lesotho 26 21 47
Liberia     4 20 13 36
Madagascar 70 35 55 31 90 281
Malawi   42 34 0 90 34 19 218
Mali 133 21 3 148 8 312
Mauritania     1   1
Mauritius 9 45 54
Mozambique 168 16 95 43 303 12 12 649
Niger 20 90 70 93 273
Rwanda 55 36 18 175 9 294
Senegal  53  0 75 12 140
Seychelles 17 17
Sierra Leone   50 12 46 18 10 137
Sudan 2 2
Tanzania 114 57 30 320 521
Togo 18 15 12 45
Uganda   92 0 175  267
Zambia 117 62 225 30 434
Total ACP Africa 500 741 419 705 140 300 2.109 679 230 5.821
323 
Adapted from: Commission (2007e), (2008t) (2009t), (2010aa), and (2011ac).

Annexes
Table A.4.5 EDF general budget support disbursements by country, 2002-2010 (EUR mln)
 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Total
Benin 6 3 18 11 9 25 26 44 26 168
Burkina Faso 25 31 38 41 45 51 53 69 78 431
Burundi 8 0 0 32 10 17 13 36 29 145
Cameroon 0 9 0 10 0 0 0 0 0 19
Cape Verde 2 9 6 5 0 3 2 7 14 48
Central African 0 1 12 1 4 10 4 17 18 66
Republic
Chad 23 0 1 21 1 1 0 0 0 46
Comoros 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 7 0 10
Congo Republic 0 0 0 0 30 0 0 0 0 31
DRC 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 84 84
Cote d’Ivoire 5 0 0 0 28 0 0 0 0 33
Djibouti 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5
Ethiopia 51 11 46 19 0 0 0 0 0 126
Gabon 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 4
| 284 |
Gambia 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4
Ghana 22 42 28 24 20 18 20 34 42 250
Guinea-Bissau 0 0 0 0 6 6 6 21 0 40
Kenya 0 0 0 50 0 41 2 1 0 94
Lesotho 6 3 6 0 0 0 0 0 35 50
Liberia 1 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 7 11
Madagascar 35 35 21 21 34 24 23 0 0 194
Malawi 0 0 16 15 27 13 33 12 112 227
Mali 15 36 30 40 29 18 14 27 19 229
Mauritania 6 6 5 0 0 15 0 0 0 31
Mauritius 0 0 0 0 0 0 52 64 48 164
Mozambique 70 41 54 46 42 45 47 59 65 470
Niger 16 24 27 29 22 15 21 1 6 163
Rwanda 28 25 13 21 18 18 17 45 30 216
Sao Tome & 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
Principe
Senegal 0 0 25 10 5 13 9 29 1 93
Seychelles 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 3 11
Sierra Leone 0 0 18 18 11 14 6 29 21 116
Sudan 0 24 0 50 100 0 0 0 0 174
Tanzania 34 69 34 33 50 14 34 45 83 395

Annexes
Table A.4.6 EDF Sector budget support by country , commitments in the period 2003-2010 
(EUR mln)
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Total
Benin 65 12 65 25 167
Botswana 50 1 60 11 122
Burkina Faso 15 2 10 50 77
Cape Verde 12 12
Ethiopia 155 157 200 512
Ghana 8 8
Guinea Bissau 6 6
Lesotho 32 32
Malawi 70 70
Mali 72 15 105 192
Mauritius 30 10 40
Mozambique 35 15 30 23 102
Namibia 21 11 60 92
| 286 |
Niger 21 15 7 43
Rwanda 32 20 52
Tanzania 44 70 114
Uganda 18 10 28
Zambia 70 13 30 6 112 231
Total Africa ACP 116 88 171 282 227 432 368 215 1,899
Anguila 8 4 12
Barbados 11 11
Dominican Republic 4 48 38 90
Grenada 7 7
Jamaica 12 33 45
St Vincent & 7 7
Grenadines
Trinidad and 27 16 44
Tobago
Total Caribbean ACP 7 11 4 90 16 33 0 55 215
Samo 15 7 22
Tonga 3 3
Total Pacific ACP 3 0 0 0 0 0 15 7 25
Total ACP 125 98 175 372 244 465 384 277 2,139

Annexes
Table A.4.7 Details on regional programmes and strategies (budgets in EUR  mln)
Region of Eastern and Southern Southern African Development Central Africa West Africa Caribbean Pacific
Africa and the Indian Ocean Community
RSP and RIP Regional Regional Regional Regional Document de Document de Document de Document de Regional Regional Regional Regional 
strategy paper strategy paper strategy paper strategy paper la stratégie la stratégie stratégie stratégie strategy paper strategy paper strategy paper strategy paper 
and regional and regional and regional and regional régionale et régionale et régionale et régionale et and regional and regional and regional and regional 
indicative indicative indicative indicative Programme Programme Programme Programme indicative indicative indicative indicative 
programme for programme for programme for programme indicatif indicatif régio- indicatif régional indicatif régional programme programme programme programme 
the period the period the period for the period régional pour nal pour la pour la période 2008-2013 2002-2007 2008-2013 2002-2007 2008-2013
2002-2007 2008-2013 2002-2007 2008-2013 la période période 2003-2007
2002-2007 2008-2013
Date November 2002 November 2008 November November January 2003 September February 2003 November 2008 May 2003 November October 2002 November 
2002 2008 2009 2008 2008
Organisation(s) COMESA, EAC, IOC and IGAD SADC CEMAC, CEEAC CEDEAO, UEMOA CARIFORM Pacific Island Forum Secretariat
Countries Angola, Burundi, Comoros, Djibouti, Angola, Botswana, DRC, Lesotho, Cameroun, Central African Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Cook islands, Federal States of 
DRC, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Republic, Chad, Congo, DRC, Ivory Coast, Gambia, Ghana, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Namibia, Seychelles, Swaziland, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Sao Guinea-Conakry, Guinea Bissau, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea, 
Namibia, Rwanda, Seychelles, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe Tome e Principe. Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Haiti, Jamaica, St Kitts and Marshall Islands, Samoa, 
Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Nigeria, Senegal, Togo Nevis, St Lucia, St Vincent and Solomon islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, 
Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe the Grenadines, Suriname, Vanuatu
Trinidad and Tobago.
Original 223 645 101 116 55 165  235 597 57 165 29 95 
| 288 |
budget 
Revised budget 161.7 59.46 249.7 97.7 39.6
Focal sectors
Economic 45-55% 85% 49% 80% 27% 57% 47% 70% 75-90% 91% 38% 47%
integration and 
324
trade
Natural resource 15-25% 35% 30% 6% Fisheries 42%
325
management (23%)
Transport and 15-25% 25% 21% 33%
326
communications
Regional political 10% 15% 10% 20%
327
integration
324 
Including e.g. trade policy and negotiation capacity building, regional customs and trade, EPA related support, 
support for tax policy reform, and reform of finance and banking sectors, human resource development and building 
up of regional institutions.
325 
E.g. support for protection of marine and coastal resources (monitoring control surveillance pelagic resource; tuna 
tagging programme), environmental education monitoring and capacity building.
326 
Including support for regional transport and communications policy and regulatory framework, investments in 
infrastructure (construction and rehabilitation), and development of transport and communication infrastructure 
master plan
327 
In particular support for the regional pillars of the pan- African architecture of conflict prevention, peace and security, 
capacity building of regional organisations, capacity development for conflict prevention and management of 
post-conflict situations and disaster management.

Annexes
Table A.4.7 Details on regional programmes and strategies (budgets in EUR  mln)
Region of Eastern and Southern Southern African Development Central Africa West Africa Caribbean Pacific
Africa and the Indian Ocean Community
Human resource 20%
328
development
Non focal 10-15% 5% 26% 5% 17% 20% 10% 14-18% 3% 19% 11%
Overall aim/main Increase To contribute to Increase Poverty reduc- Contribute to Promote Contribute to Contribute to Beneficial Beneficial Contribute to 
objective economic the eradication economic tion, economic peace and poverty reduction poverty integration of integration of Pacific Leaders 
growth and of poverty in the growth and supporting growth and security, a through better reduction the Caribbean the Caribbean vision for a 
reduce poverty region’s reduce poverty the poverty strong regional through better region into region into the region of 
through higher countries and in the SADC acceleration reduction reduction in economic regional the world world peace, 
levels of assist them in region through of economic through poverty and growth, economic economy economy, harmony, 
regional attaining the higher levels of growth and regional sustainable facilitated by a growth, through a allowing the security and 
economic MDGs, as regional development economic management strengthening of facilitated by a global region to economic 
integration enshrined in the economic in the SADC integration of natural regional strengthening of repositioning better reap the prosperity 
ACP-EC integration region resources economic regional aimed at benefits of where all its 
Partnership through integration of integration and achieving globalisation people can 
Agreement, by deeper levels West African better sustainable and lead free and 
supporting of regional countries integration into economic countering its worthwhile 
economic economic the world growth, negative lives
growth and integration economy regional impact, thus 
developing trade and political cohesion and leading to 
cooperation stability and sustainable 
continued economic 
| 290 |
improvements growth, 
in living regional 
conditions. cohesion and 
stability, and 
continued 
improvements 
in living 
conditions.
328 
Including reinforcing regional institutions that support basic education and vocational work-related training, 
curriculum review, development of TVET training and work based programmes, and support for non-state 
actors.

Annexes
Table A.4.8 Intra-ACP overview 10th EDF
Overall objective Specific objectives Indicative 
allocation 
(EUR  mln)
Global initiatives
Health GFATM To reduce the impact of (i) To promote the harmonisation and 150 
the three pandemics (HIV/ alignment principles within the Global (2008-
AIDS, tuberculosis and Fund Board. (ii) To secure integration of 2010) + 150 
malaria) in the ACP states GFATM activities into national plans to (2011-
fight the three pandemics and reinforce 2013)
health systems.
All-ACP initiatives
Global Climate To address climate change (i) To increase the capacity of ACP 40 
Change Alliance as a threat to progress countries to adapt to the effects of climate 
(GCCA) towards achieving the change. (ii) To ensure that ACP countries 
MDGs also participate in the global climate 
change mitigation effort where it benefits 
their poverty reduction objectives
Renewable To contribute to comba- (i) To increase access to affordable and 200 for 
energy ting climate change and to sustainable energy services for the rural Energy 
achieving the MDGs and and peri-urban Facility
| 292 |
WSSD objectives on poor by means of renewable energy 
energy by: improving use solutions as well as measures of energy 
of renewable energy efficiency. (ii) To strengthen regional 
resources; improving energy cooperation and markets, notably 
energy security and access for renewable energy solutions. (iii) To 
to renewable and improve governance and framework 
sustainable energy services conditions in the energy sector at regional, 
and mitigating CO2 emissi- national and local levels, in particular 
ons in ACP countries; those aiming at the promotion of 
improving capacity renewable energy. (iv) To seize opportuni-
management, governance ties offered in the area of biomass and 
and frameworks in the biofuels where this is a sustainable option.
energy sector
Environment To contribute to sustaina- To strengthen the capacity of ACP States 70 
ble management of the to fulfil their obligations under the 
environment and natural Multilateral Environmental Agreements . 
resources by means of To strengthen their negotiating capacity in 
specific activities in ACP connection with the relevant Conventions
countries
Disaster risk To improve the level of To reduce the social, economic and 180
reduction security of the population environmental costs of natural disasters in 
of ACP States ACP States. Ultimately, to fight against 
poverty

Annexes
Table A.4.8 Intra-ACP overview 10th EDF
Overall objective Specific objectives Indicative 
allocation 
(EUR  mln)
Water and (i) To help achieve the To contribute to the achievement of the 200 from 
sanitation water and sanitation MDG targets on water and sanitation for the Water 
Millennium Development the rural, urban and peri-urban poor by Facility
Goals (MDGs) which is to promoting the use of small-scale 
halve by 2015, the appropriate technologies, as well as 
proportion of people through the provision of catalytic funding 
without sustainable access for the development of larger-scale 
to safe drinking water and infrastructure, complementary and 
basic sanitation, vital in subsidiary to national and regional 
themselves but also key initiatives to reduce poverty and water 
prerequisites for reducing and sanitation-related diseases. (ii) To 
child and maternal enhance ownership and sustainability of 
mortality (MDGs 4 & 5) water and sanitation investments by the 
and combating diseases active involvement of local partners and 
(MDG 6). (ii) To contribute local government in project implementa-
to improving water tion, and training for capacity building of 
governance and manage- local people and government staff. (iii) To 
ment of water resources improve governance in water and 
and to the sustainable sanitation and management of water 
| 294 |
development of hydraulic resources at regional/transboundary, 
infrastructure national and local levels facilitating the 
development of sustainable hydraulic 
infrastructure.
Science and (i) To address the scientific To strengthen ACP States’ S&T base in 40 
research divide and to strengthen terms of higher priority policies, human 
the ACP States’ capacity in and institutional capacity and ability to 
the areas of science and create, access and use scientific know-
technology (S&T) and ledge. (ii) To increase AU-EU S&T 
innovation (PSTICB-2) with cooperation, in particular participation of 
particular emphasis on AU research teams in European Research 
integrated approaches to Framework Programmes. (iii) To 
enable creation, uptake participate in the generation of appropri-
and use of scientific ate results, products and services across 
knowledge in ACP the range of relevant biotechnologies, 
institutions and social and including through expanded cooperation. 
economic actors. (ii) To (iv) To enhance cooperation on use of 
enhance use of S&T as key sustainable and affordable space 
enablers for poverty applications and technology to support 
reduction, growth and Africa’s sustainable development 
socio-economic develop- objectives. (v) To allow decision-makers to 
ment. (iii) To contribute to benefit from the latest developments in 
dissemination and the four domains of biotechnology: green 
adoption of relevant (as applied in agriculture and food 
biotechnologies for food production), blue (aquatic organisms), 
security and poverty white (industrial processes, waste 
reduction in ACP countries. management and environmental remedia-
tion) and red (healthcare).

Annexes
Table A.4.8 Intra-ACP overview 10th EDF
Overall objective Specific objectives Indicative 
allocation 
(EUR  mln)
Migration To make migration work (i) To facilitate mobility and free 40 
policy for development, movement of people within the geograp-
migration and mobility hical zones of the ACP Group. (ii) To 
issues should be fully manage legal migration better amongst 
integrated into, and ACP countries and between them and the 
contribute to, the national EU. (iii) To find practical solutions to 
and regional development problems posed by illegal migratory flows. 
strategies of ACP (iv) To combat smuggling and trafficking in 
countries. In the case of human beings, in particular women and 
African States, this children, effectively. (v) To ensure effective 
objective will, in particular, protection of migrants’ rights; (v) To 
be pursued in the context enhance capacity to ensure international 
of the Joint Africa-EU protection for persons in need of it
Strategy and the Africa-EU 
Partnership on Migration, 
Mobility and Employment.
329
Trade and To build capacity for trade (i) To upgrade the capacity of national 95
private-sector policy formulation, stakeholders to participate effectively in 
| 296 |
development implementation, impact ongoing and forthcoming trade negotiati-
and monitoring of trade ons. (ii) To upgrade the capacity of 
agreements, adjustment to national stakeholders to design and 
trading and trade related implement trade development and impact 
standards and improve- strategies and aid for trade programmes. 
ment of the business (iii) To build capacity for compliance with 
climate. sanitary, phytosanitary and other technical 
norms and standards. (iv) To improve the 
business environment, with particular 
emphasis on access to finance (SMEs and 
microfinance). (v) To promote medium 
and long term food security by improving 
competiveness of commodity sectors, 
through a value chain approach and 
reducing risks.
Health (i) To strengthen the capacity of health systems in ACP countries to 30 
deliver basic universally available healthcare. (ii) To address specific key 
priorities in the ACP region, including the implementation of internatio-
nal health regulations and conventions and to strengthen relevant 
institutional capacity in the region
329 
According to the Strategy Paper, this budget is sub-divided as follows: EUR 35 million for sanitary and 
phytosanitary (SPS) measures (approximately EUR 33 million for the Pesticides Initiative Programme – 
PIP-II – and approximately EUR 2 million for the Standards and Trade Development Facility – STDF). 
EUR 15 million for measures against technical barriers to trade (TBT) (adaptation to the REACH 
Regulation). EUR 30 million for private-sector development (Microfinance, programme for improve-
ment of business environment and innovative flagship projects). EUR 20 million for support of 
agricultural policies.

Annexes
Table A.4.8 Intra-ACP overview 10th EDF
Overall objective Specific objectives Indicative 
allocation 
(EUR  mln)
Agriculture and (i) To support implementa- (i) To strengthen agricultural organisations 40 
rural develop- tion of the pan-African or institutions and agricultural and food 
ment policies agricultural agenda security related policy formulation and 
developed in the implementation processes, involving 
framework of the continental and regional-level stakehol-
Comprehensive Africa ders, including non-State actors. (ii) In 
Agricultural Development operational terms, to focus the all-ACP 
Programme and also the programme on land policy, mainly on 
Priority Action on Food capacity building, coordination and 
Security in the Joint awareness-raising at continental level and 
EU-Africa Strategy and the in the various sub regions and selected 
EU-Africa Partnership on pilot projects at community level by 
Cotton. (ii) To provide facilitating learning by doing and local 
adequate support for institution-building, focusing on common 
finalisation and implemen- property in rural livelihoods and  commu-
tation of the continental nity empowerment.
process aiming at 
developing a framework 
and guidelines for land 
| 298 |
policy in Africa.
Sanitary To reinforce veterinary Trans-boundary circulation of pathogens 30 
services governance together with the principle that public 
health is a global public good justify a 
strong sub-regional and/or regional 
dimension to these efforts. As announced 
in different fora, dedicated chapters of the 
Commission’s aid programmes will target 
major emerging or re-emerging infectious 
diseases by promoting strong veterinary 
and human health governance. Good 
governance requires both legislation and 
the human and financial resources 
necessary to apply it.
Institutional and support expenditure
Joint Parlia- To ensure stronger (i) To ensure active participation by ACP 10 
mentary connections between the MPs in Joint Parliamentary Assembly 
Assembly Cotonou- and EPA-related Sessions and regional meetings, 
parliamentary institutions fact-finding and election observation 
and the national missions, including with non-State actors. 
parliaments. (ii) To improve interaction between the 
work of the Cotonou and regional 
parliamentary institutions and the ACP 
national parliaments

Annexes
Table A.4.9 EU financed Aid for Trade programmes
ACP-MTS programme Main purposes are: (a) to assist ACP countries in reforming and adjusting to 
the multilateral trading system; (b) to improve their capacity to negotiate 
and implement multilateral trade agreements; (c) To integrate trade into the 
development process of the ACP countries and (d) to facilitate accession of 
ACP member countries to the WTO. Funding is e.g. provided to provide ad 
hoc support to ACP delegations on WTO Doha negotiations, strengthen the 
members of regional organisations in trade policy formulation, to improve 
trade related laws and regulations, etc.
Standards and Trade The EU supports this global partnership of the Food and Agriculture Organiza-
Development Facility tion, the World Organisation for Animal Health, the World Bank, the World 
(STDF) Health Organization and the World Trade Organization. The Facility supports 
developing countries in building their capacity to implement international 
sanitary and phytosanitary standards, guidelines and recommendations.
EU-Africa Partnership The EU contributes to the financing of the Action Framework of the partnership 
on Cotton that goes back to 2004. Overall objective of the Action Framework is to support 
African cotton value chains so that they can contribute to the development of 
agriculture and to poverty alleviation. It focuses on six strategic areas, i.e. (a) 
Improvement of the capacities to develop, monitor, assess and update national 
and regional cotton strategies; (b) Improvement of the institutional environ -
ment, the internal organization and their efficiency; (c) Improvement of the 
competitiveness of the cotton value chains in Africa; (d) Reduction in the 
| 300 |
vulnerability of cotton value chains; (e) Increase value addition generated by 
the cotton value chains; and (f) Strengthening efficiency and effectiveness of 
coordination at international, regional and national levels. Under the 
Partnership, EU financial assistance directly linked to cotton was in 2012 
currently about €327 million of which 56% channelled through the EU and the 
remainder through EU Member States. Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire and 
Mali account for almost 60% of aid flows.
EU forest Law The Facility, set up in 2007, is funded by the EU, the Governments of Finland, 
Enforcement, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain and the UK and the European Forest 
Governance and Trade Institute. It aims to improve governance in the forestry sector, contributing to 
(FLEGT) facility poverty reduction and sustainable management of forestry resources. There is 
a FLEGT Action Plan, published in 2003, ‘consists of support for timber-produ-
cing countries, efforts to develop multilateral collaboration to combat the 
trade in illegally harvested timber, voluntary measures to support governments 
wanting to ensure that illegally harvested timber from their territory is not 
admitted to the EU market, public procurement policy, private sector initiatives, 
measures to avoid investment in activities which encourage illegal logging, and 
conflict timber’(Commission (2003n)).

Annexes
Table A.4.10 Infrastructure Trust Fund funding 2007-2010 (in EUR mln)
Sector Co-financing Type Region
2007 2008 2009 2010 * **
East African 2,6 ICT EIB, KfW, AFD, DPF Central and 
Submarine Cable IFC, AfDB and East Africa
System (Eassy Cable) DBSA
Félou Hydropower 9,3 E EIB, Senegal IRS West Africa 
River Basin and Sahel
Organisation 
(OMVS) and 
World Bank
Ethiopia-Kenya 0,6 E AFD, KfW, TA Central and 
Interconnector AfDB, DBSA, East Africa
Ethiopian 
Electric Power 
Corporation, 
Kenya’s Energy 
Ministry
WAPP - CLSG power 3 E EIB, KfW TA West Africa 
Interconnection and Sahel
project
| 302 |
Caprivi interconnec- 15 E Namibia Power IRS Southern 
tor (Zambia, Namibia) (‘Nam-Power’),  Africa
EIB, KfW and 
AFD
Ruzizi 2,8 E TA Central and 
East Africa
Beira Blantyre 29 T EIB, Nether- IRS Southern 
Corridor lands (ORET), Africa
Danida, IDA/
World Bank, 
and own funds 
OMVS Gouina Hydro 1 E AFD TA West Africa 
Power Project (GHPP) and Sahel
Benin-Togo power 12,3 E EIB, KfW IRS West Africa 
rehabilitation and Sahel
Port de Pointe Noire 6,6 T EIB, AFD IRS West Africa 
and Sahel
JKIA Nairobi airport 5 T EIB, AFD TA Central and 
East Africa
WAPP Coastal 1,75 E EIB TA West Africa 
backbone and Sahel
332 
Adapted from EIB. (2008). EU-Africa Infrastructure Trust Fund. Annual report 2007; EIB. (2009). 
EU-Africa Infrastructure Trust Fund. Annual report 2008; EIB. (2010). EU-Africa Infrastructure Trust 
Fund. Annual report 2009; EIB. (2011). EU-Africa Infrastructure Trust Fund. Annual report 2010

Annexes
Table A.4.10 Infrastructure Trust Fund funding 2007-2010 (in EUR mln)
Sector Co-financing Type Region
2007 2008 2009 2010 * **
Integrated Transport 0,6 T EIB TA Southern 
Master Plan for Africa
Namibia
Tanzania backbone 24,3 E EIB IRS Central and 
interconnector East Africa
Seychelles submarine 4 ICT EIB DPF Southern 
cable Africa
Feasibility study 1,4 ICT AFD TA African 
Western part of continent
UMOJANET
Total 15,5 47,8 31,0 110,8
* E = Energy; T = Transport; ICT = Information and Communication Technology; T = Transport; W = Water: 
M = Multi-sector
** DPF = Direct Project Funding; IRS = Interest Rate Subsidy; TA = Technical Assistance
| 304 |

Annexes
362 2011 De Methodische kwaliteit van Programma-evaluaties in 978-90-5328-418-6
het Medefinancieringsstelsel-I 2007-2010
361 2011 Evaluatie van de Twinningfaciliteit Suriname-Nederland 978-90-5328-417-9
360 2011 More than Water: Impact evaluation of drinking water 978-90-5328-414-8
supply and sanitation interventions in rural Mozambi-
que
359 2011 Regionaal en geïntegreerd beleid? Evaluatie van het 978-90-5328-416-2
Nederlandse beleid met betrekking tot de Westelijke 
Balkan 2004-2008
358 2011 Assisting Earthquake victims: Evaluation of Dutch 978-90-5328-413-1
Cooperating aid agencies (SHO) Support to Haiti in 2010
357 2011 Le risque d’effets éphémères: Evaluation d’impact des 978-90-5328-415-5
programmes d’approvisionnement en eau potable et 
d’assainissement au Bénin
357 2011 The risk of vanishing effects: Impact Evaluation of 978-90-5328-412-4
drinking water supply and sanitation programmes in 
rural Benin
356 2011 Between High Expectations and Reality: An evaluation  978-90-5328-411-7
of budget support in Zambia 
355 2011 Lessons Learnt: Synthesis of literature on the impact 978-90-5328-410-0
| 306 |
and effectiveness of investments in education
354 2011 Leren van NGOs: Studie van de basic education 978-90-5328-409-4
interventies van geselecteerde Nederlandse NGOs
353 2011 Education matters: Policy review of the Dutch 978-90-5328-408-7
contribution to basic education 1999–2009
352 2011 Unfinished business: making a difference in basic 978-90-5328-407-0
education. An evaluation of the impact of education 
policies in Zambia and the role of budget support
351 2011 Confianza sin confines: Contribución holandesa a la edu- 978-90-5328-406-3
cación básica en Bolivia (2000-2009)
350 2011 Unconditional Trust: Dutch support to basic education in 978-90-5328-405-6
Bolivia (2000-2009)
349 2011 The two-pronged approach Evaluation of Netherlands 978-90-5328-404-9
Support to Formal and Non-formal Primary Education in 
Bangladesh, 1999-2009
348 2011 Schoon schip. En dan? Evaluatie van de schuldverlichting 978-90-5328-403-2
aan de Democratische Republiek Congo 2003-2010 
(Verkorte samenvatting)
347 2011 Table rase – et après? Evaluation de l’Allègement de la 978-90-5328-402-5
Dette en République Démocratique du Congo 
2003-2010
346 2011 Vijf Jaar Top van Warschau De Nederlandse inzet voor 978-90-5328-401-8
versterking van de Raad van Europa

Annexes
326 2009 Evaluatie van de Atlantische Commissie (2006-2009) 978-90-5328-380-6
325 2009 Beleidsdoorlichting van het Nederlandse exportcon- 978-90-5328-379-0
trole- en wapenexportbeleid
- 2009 Evaluation policy and guidelines for evaluations No ISBN
324 2009 Investing in Infrastructure 978-90-5328-378-3
- 2009 Synthesis of impact evaluations in sexual and reproduc- 978-90-5328-376-9
tive health and rights
323 2009 Preparing the ground for a safer World 978-90-5328-377-6
322 2009 Draagvlakonderzoek. Evalueerbaarheid en resultaten 978-90-5328-375-2
321 2009 Maatgesneden Monitoring ‘Het verhaal achter de cijfers’ 978-90-5328-374-5
If you want to receive a publication in printed form, please send an e-mail to  
IOB@minbuza.nl, mentioning the title and ISBN number. 
| 308 |

Published by:
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Policy and Operations Evaluation Department (IOB)
| 310 | P.O. Box 20061 | 2500 EB The Hague | The Netherlands
www.government.nl/foreign-policy-evaluations 
www.oecd.org/derec
© Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands | March 2013
Dutch translation of Summary and Conclusions: Translation Department Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands
Layout: VijfKeerBlauw | Rijswijk
Photography: 
Cover:  Flags of Europe, ACP countries and the Netherands
Part I:  P olicy Matters: Joseph Luns (left), Netherlands Foreign Minister, and Johannes 
Linthorst Homan (right), Head of the Netherlands Delegation to the 
Intergovernmental Conference on the Common Market and Euratom, signing the 
Treaty of Rome, © Centre Virtuel de de la Connaissance sur l’ Europe (CVCE), 
Luxembourg 
Part II:  Management Matters: L omé I: A banner with the writing: “Lomé Convention; a 
step along the road towards the liberation of the people of Africa, the Caribbean 
and the Pacific” describing the EEC/ACP Convention, © European Commission 
Audiovisual services
Part III:  L omé II: Young Togolese demonstrating with a banner giving encouragement for 
the Lomé II Convention (1979), © European Commission Audiovisual services
ISBN: 978-90-5328-436-0

