 
 
  
Report of the 2013 
LANGUAGE OF 
research group on 
language of 
INSTRUCTION IN SINT 
instruction in Sint 
Eustatius 
EUSTATIUS 
 
Nicholas Faraclas, Ellen-Petra Kester and Eric Mijts 

Introduction 4 
Executive summary of results and recommendations of the 2013 research group on language of instruction in St. 
Eustatius 5 
Executive summary of results 5 
Conclusions of the Report on the questionnaires administered by the research group during their second visit to 
St. Eustatius in April 2013 7 
Conclusions of the narrative proficiency tests administered by the research group during their second visit to St. 
Eustatius in April 2013 10 
Recommendations of the 2013 research group on language of instruction in Sint Eustatius 11 
1. Literature research: The educational and social impacts of language policy in St. Eustatius in comparison 
with other societies worldwide 16 
1. Introduction 16 
2. A negative example: language policy in Puerto Rico 19 
3. Educación Intercultural Bilingüe: first language education in Latin America 21 
4. Tokples Priskul in Papua New Guinea 27 
5. First Language Education in Papiamentu/o in the ABC Islands 31 
6. The transition from Kiswahili to English in Tanzanian secondary schools 34 
7. First language education in Dutch in Flanders 38 
2. Language attitude and use survey: Report on the questionnaires administered by the research group during 
their second visit to St. Eustatius in April 2013 39 
1. Introduction 39 
2. Methodology 39 
3. Results 42 
3.1 Demographic characteristics of the participants 42 
3.2 Language use 44 
3.3 The importance of Dutch in different domains 47 
3.4 Attitudes toward language and education 50 
4. Statistical analysis of the results 63 
4.1 Introduction 63 
4.2 Comparison between the groups of students 63 
4.3 Comparison between parents and members of the general public 67 
5. Conclusions 69 
3. Narrative proficiency test: Results of the narrative proficiency tests administered by the research group 
during their second visit to St. Eustatius in April 2013 73 
1. Introduction 73 
2 | P a g e 
 

Introduction 
In 2012 the three members of this research group were approached by Rijksdienst Caribisch Nederland 
to investigate the benefits of and the attitudes towards Dutch and English as languages of instruction in 
primary, secondary and vocational education on the island of Sint Eustatius. This research project was 
initiated by the former Commissioner of Education in Sint Eustatius. G. Schmidt, and the former Minister 
of Education, Culture and Science in Holland, M. van Bijsterveldt-Vliegenthart. The research team was 
composed of three researchers from three different universities: prof. dr .Nicholas Faraclas of the 
University of Puerto Rico, dr. Ellen-Petra Kester of the University of Utrecht and drs. Eric Mijts of the 
University of Aruba. The assignment consisted of a literature and context study (as can be found in 
chapters 1. Literature research, chapter 3. Narrative proficiency test and chapter 4. Classroom 
observations and stakeholder interviews) and a survey and interview study (as can be found in chapter 
2. Language attitude and use survey and chapter 4. Classroom observations and stakeholder interviews). 
The team visited the island twice. During the first preliminary visit from 21 February – 2 March 2013 the 
methodology of the research project was decided upon and stakeholder interviews were conducted in 
order to set up the interview guidelines and the survey questions for the second visit. During the second 
visit from 13 – 26 April 2013 the focus group interviews were conducted, the surveys were distributed 
and collected, dozens of classroom observations were conducted and the narrative proficiency 
assessments were administered. 
This report consists of 5 chapters, preceded by an executive summary. In the first chapter, Literature 
research, an overview is given of case studies and theory on societies and educational systems that have 
had to cope with challenges in language and education that are similar to the ones Sint Eustatius 
currently confronts and the effect of different systems on language attitudes and proficiency. Chapter 
two deals with the results, analysis and conclusions of the survey that was conducted during the second 
site visit. Chapter three describes the methodology, findings and conclusions of the narrative proficiency 
test and chapter four contains the findings obtained from classroom observations and focus group 
interviews, as well as general observations of the first and second site visits. Finally, chapter five 
provides the recommendations of the research group concerning the language of instruction in Sint 
Eustatius. 
 
  
4 | P a g e 
 

Netherlands, while their competence in English is far below that of their counterparts in most other 
English speaking communities. For the great majority of students who have very limited access to Dutch 
outside the school system (and, hence, should be considered Foreign Language students), the use of 
Dutch as the language of instruction is having a negative effect on academic performance in both English 
and Dutch, as demonstrated by the results of the Narrative Proficiency Test and observed in the 
interviews with the stakeholders.  
There is no VWO stream in secondary education, while only a very small number of pupils make it to the 
final exam of HAVO, and even fewer manage to complete tertiary education. Many of the students in 
the more academic tracks of secondary education would have actually been placed in lower tracks in 
Holland. All of the stakeholders agree unequivocally that very few students get enough academic Dutch 
to even be considered for schooling in the European Netherlands, and of those who are considered, 
most return to Statia without a degree. The vast majority of the stakeholders state that the 
disadvantages of the Dutch system by far exceed any possible advantages . 
Although one or another of the stakeholders (teachers, students, parents, politicians, etc.) have 
sometimes been singled out for criticism at various points over the years for these shortcomings, the 
results of the Attitude and Use Survey as well as the results of the Interviews and Class Observations do 
not indicate any lack of commitment, enthusiasm, intelligence, hard work, or creativity on the part of 
any of the stakeholders on Sint Eustatius. Instead, what emerges from the Literature Research (Section 
1) are both societal and language policy problems shared by the education system in Sint Eustatius with 
education systems in other societies in the Caribbean and beyond, where the language of instruction is 
not one of the students’ first language(s), and where, despite a similarly high degree of dedication and 
1
diligence, similarly disappointing results are obtained. The Literature Research also illustrates how 
changes in language policy have helped some of these troubled education systems to effectively address 
some of these problems and improve students’ performance not only in their first language, but in the 
other languages and subjects that they will need to master for academic and professional success as 
well.  
The present researchers and all of the stakeholders on St. Eustatius are acutely aware of the fact that 
many of the general societal problems facing education on the island cannot be simply addressed by 
changes in educational policy and approach, and will take many years and major social changes to solve. 
Along with many stakeholders, we contend nevertheless that some problems, such as those caused by 
language policies which do not represent best pedagogical practice, can be addressed here and now, 
with palpable positive results. In this document, we will therefore focus on what can be done at the 
level of educational policy, approach, and practice to help all of the stakeholders in the education 
system on Sint Eustatius to achieve their stated goals, which include high quality education for all (not 
just for a talented few or for the few who have access to Dutch outside of school) and high levels of 
competence in both English and Dutch (not in English only or in Dutch only). 
                                                           
1
 In Papua New Guinea, for example, the use of the students’ first language as language of instruction has been 
seen as an effective way to help increase involvement of parents in their children’s education, to increase 
students’ identification with their educational process and to boost students’ self esteem, with the general aim of 
decreasing dropout rates, alienation, and delinquency. 
6 | P a g e 
 

Language use  
Statian English is widely used by all groups except for the teachers, not only in informal situations such 
as with family and friends, but also with colleagues. In conversations with strangers, Statian English is 
2
frequently replaced by school/standard English by adults. The use of Dutch is rather limited across all 
categories of participants, except for the teachers. We only find high percentages for the use of Dutch in 
the case of students communicating with their teachers, although teachers indicate that they use 
standard/school English more frequently to communicate with students and colleagues outside of 
school.  
The importance of Dutch in different domains  
The results indicate a strong consensus with respect to the importance of Dutch for the population of St. 
Eustatius. All categories agree that Dutch is only important for instrumental purposes, related to 
education and the job market, as indicated by the high percentages for the following activities: (i) 
passing tests, (ii) earning money & getting a job, (iii) reading & writing and (iv) raising children. The 
percentages for the importance of Dutch are slightly higher in the categories of students and slightly 
lower in the categories of parents of students in secondary education and teachers. Dutch is less or not 
important for integrative functions related to social activities within the community, such as making 
friends, being liked and talking on the phone. 
Attitudes toward language and education  
Most of the participants do not feel strong ties with the Netherlands, but in general they have a positive 
attitude toward Dutch in the sense that they like hearing the language, want to improve their skills in 
Dutch and strongly disagree with the statement that learning Dutch is a waste of time. Only students in 
secondary education and their parents have a less positive attitude toward Dutch. 
A vast majority thinks that the school system should help the students develop reading and writing skills 
in Dutch, but the results suggest that the students are not optimally prepared to achieve this goal. In 
general students do not like their Dutch textbooks and parents have trouble helping their children with 
homework in Dutch. Attitudes are particularly more negative among students in secondary education 
and their parents, as students feel less free to express themselves in Dutch and they are not very 
motivated to study abroad in a Dutch speaking country.  
Attitudes toward standard/school English are positive, as are attitudes toward education in English, 
especially among students in secondary education and their parents, who also favour future studies in 
an English rather than in a Dutch speaking country. In fact most of the participants are advocates of an 
education system that leads to a high competence in both English and Dutch, which is not surprising in 
view of the worldwide importance of English and the importance attributed to Dutch for education and 
the job market indicated by the results of this survey. The overall positive attitudes toward bilingualism 
further corroborate this hypothesis. 
                                                           
2
 Standard/school English is used as an umbrella term for officially recognized and standardized varieties of English, 
as used in education systems all over the world. 
8 | P a g e 
 

English and Dutch and want to improve their skills in both languages. Attitudes toward bilingualism are 
positive and so are attitudes toward school/standard English as well as Dutch. 
Students in secondary education as well as their parents share less positive attitudes toward Dutch and 
education in Dutch than those found among other groups. A statistical analysis confirms that attitudes 
are particularly more negative among students who did not attend the Schakelklas and, hence, had less 
preparation before they were immersed/submerged in a secondary education system whose goal is the 
exclusive use of a language of instruction which is a foreign language for the majority of the population.  
Conclusions of the narrative proficiency tests administered by the research 
group during their second visit to St. Eustatius in April 2013 
 
The goal of the narrative proficiency test was to find out (1) What happens to the language proficiency 
in English during the transitional phase? and (2) To what extent does proficiency in Dutch after the 
transitional phase match proficiency in English? Attempting to answer these questions has also yielded 
information on the written language skills of the students in general. 
It is clear that the language skills for Dutch and English in groep 7 and groep 8 of primary school do not 
meet the requirements set down in the core objectives for Dutch primary education. In any case, the 
students in groep 7 and groep 8 perform much better when they write in English than when they write 
in Dutch. 
The written language proficiency in English of the students in and after Schakelklas, and in the third year 
of vocational education does not show any noticeable progress in comparison with the students from 
groep 7 and groep 8. The development of their written language proficiency in English comes to a 
standstill from the moment students leave primary school.  
The written language skills for Dutch improves between groep 7 and the first year of secondary 
education, but in most cases proficiency in English is still better when the students are in Schakelklas. 
After having gone through the language proficiency program in Schakelklas and almost all of the first 
year of HAVO, their written proficiency for both Dutch and English is still below all of the core targets for 
mother tongue education in the Dutch primary education system. The same applies to the students in 
the third year of vocational education. 
While administering the tests, the students at all levels demonstrated a collective negative attitude 
towards Dutch, and students who were expected to write their first story in Dutch postponed the task or 
started to act out instead of attending to it. This widespread negative attitude toward expressing oneself 
in Dutch should be of major concern to all of the stakeholders in the educational system in St. Eustatius. 
Besides making it extremely difficult to remedy students’ grossly insufficient skills in Dutch, it condemns 
the majority of students to failure in the present system, which currently insists on the use of Dutch as 
the language of instruction and assessment in all classes in secondary school, as well as in many classes 
at the primary level. 
10 | P a g e 
 

meaningful participation of students, teachers, parents, and other stakeholders in the 
educational process. 
 
Based on all of the evidence and these conclusions, we advance the following language policy 
options for achieving maximal informal and academic competence in both English and Dutch in the 
schools of St. Eustatius: 
Option 1:  
 Standard/school English as the only language of instruction and as the language of initial 
literacy in the pre-primary, primary, and secondary schools, with attention paid to the 
transition from Statian English to Standard/school English during the first years. Dutch 
should be taught consistently and systematically as a foreign language at all of these levels.  
 Foreign language instruction in Dutch should follow a strategy of spelend onderwijs at the 
pre-primary level and during the first years of primary school, to ensure that all students 
gain a sufficient informal competence in Dutch to allow them to begin to acquire an 
academic competence in Dutch.  
 Literacy in English should begin to be taught in the first years of primary school, while 
literacy in Dutch should not be introduced until a solid foundation has been established in 
reading and writing English (probably in groep 5 of primary school).  
 Thereafter, academic competence in Dutch can be further consolidated on the basis of 
students’ academic competence in English. This means that, in general, academic concepts 
should be taught in English first before they are introduced in Dutch. 
 
Option 2:  
 Standard/school English as the only language of instruction and as the language of initial 
literacy in the pre-primary, primary, and secondary schools, with attention paid to the 
transition from Statian English to Standard/school English during the first years. Dutch 
should be taught consistently and systematically as a foreign language at all of these levels.  
 Foreign language instruction in Dutch should follow a strategy of spelend onderwijs at the 
pre-primary level and during the first years of primary school, to ensure that all students 
gain a sufficient informal competence in Dutch to allow them to begin to acquire an 
academic competence in Dutch.  
 Literacy in English should begin to be taught in the first years of primary school, while 
literacy in Dutch should not be introduced until a solid foundation has been established in 
reading and writing English (probably in groep 5 of primary school).  
 Thereafter, academic competence in Dutch can be further consolidated on the basis of 
students’ academic competence in English. This means that, in general, academic concepts 
should be taught in English first before they are introduced in Dutch. 
 At the end of the second year of secondary school students can opt:  
o 1) to continue on an academic, professional, or practical track with English as the 
language of instruction and Dutch as a foreign language; or  
o 2) to shift to a HAVO or VMBO track with Dutch as the language of instruction if they 
plan on further studies in the European Netherlands or the ABC islands (in which 
12 | P a g e 
 

12) Stronger linkages should be forged with support agencies such as Edu Partners, the Mega D 
Foundation, the Education Care Expertise Center, the Youth and Family Office to provide 
counseling, study skills, and other services to complement those provided in the schools. 
13) Parents should be reintegrated into their children’s learning process and more time should be 
made available for parent-teacher meetings. Report cards should be made more user friendly to 
give a clearer overall picture of students’ performance, parents should be allowed to sit in on 
classes and participate whenever possible. Dutch classes should be organized for adults/parents. 
14) More attractive opportunities should be made available to students to use Dutch outside of 
school and to cultivate an appreciation for the language. Perhaps the system of summer camps 
in the European Netherlands could be revived. The secondary school should make further 
attempts to reconnect with the surrounding community. 
15) Special attention should be paid to the particular needs of the high percentage of students who 
were not born in St. Eustatius and/or are not Dutch citizens. These needs may be twofold: 
scholarships for secondary education students (between the ages of 16-18) who are not Dutch 
citizens and special attention for students from Spanish speaking and other backgrounds who 
may not wish to pursue their studies in the European Netherlands.  
16) All standardized national testing should be in English, except for: 1) tests for competence in 
Dutch as a foreign language (here ‘Profiel Taalvaardigheid Hoger Onderwijs’ of ‘Certificaat 
Nederlands als Vreemde Taal’ can be utilized as a guide); 2) tests in the HAVO and VMBO tracks 
(if Option 2 is selected); 3) any students who opt to be tested in Dutch. Some experimentation 
could be done whereby the Dutch exams could be translated both linguistically (into English) 
and culturally to suit the St. Eustatian context. 
17) The appropriate legal framework should be identified for the use of English as language of 
instruction.  
18) Where there are questions and stumbling blocks in the implementation of a system with English 
as the language of instruction and Dutch as a foreign language, reference can be made to the 
school system on Saba which generally follows the British (CXCE) system and to the St. Eustatius 
Terminal School which generally follows the US (College Board) system, to determine the 
optimal solution for the schools on St. Eustatius.  
19) Statian English: At all levels, teachers should normally use Standard English rather than Statian 
English in their classes, and expect students to do the same. Whenever Statian English is used by 
students in class, teachers should immediately take advantage of the moment to demonstrate 
to students how the same thing is said in Standard English, gently and non-judgmentally 
reminding the students of the contexts where Standard English is the preferred form, such as at 
school.  
20) Dutch should be taught as a Foreign Language, as the vast majority of the students are non-
speakers of Dutch with very limited access to Dutch outside the school system. Crucially, Dutch 
cannot be taught as first or second language. Foreign language education to foreign language 
speakers can be demonstrated to be more effective than first or even second language 
instruction to foreign language speakers (i.e. non-speakers) of Dutch or any other language. 
Models of Bilingual Education (Dutch-English) in Holland cannot be adapted to Sint Eustatius, 
because of the different status of the two languages in the two parts of the Kingdom. English is 
increasingly becoming a second language in the European Netherlands. Students in Holland 
have massive access to English through the media, fostering high comprehension levels on a 
daily basis from early on, which facilitates the use of English as a language of instruction in the 
European Netherlands within a model of bilingual education. The same is not true for Dutch in 
Sint Eustatius, where English is the dominant language and Dutch does not play a significant role 
in most peoples’ daily lives, apart from school and governance.  
14 | P a g e 
 

1. Literature research: The educational and social impacts of 
language policy in St. Eustatius in comparison with other societies 
worldwide 
 
1. Introduction 
One of the points on which there is total agreement among all of the stakeholders in the educational 
system on St. Eustatius (including students, parents, teachers, educational administrators, school board 
members, social workers, community members, and politicians, see Section 4 below: Class Observations 
and Interviews) is that the system is in deep crisis and that things are going from bad to worse. The 
consistently and shockingly low levels of academic performance of St. Eustatian students in comparison 
to their counterparts in the European Netherlands and the alarming and rapidly escalating social 
problems experienced both by students presently in the system and by young people who are no longer 
students but whose lives have been shaped by the system, provide independent and empirical evidence 
for these stakeholder observations. Many of these stakeholders have given profound and serious 
thought to the identification and analysis of the causes of this crisis and all agree that the current 
situation is the result of a complex configuration of historical, social, political, economic, and 
pedagogical factors.  
In this document, we will focus on the pedagogical factors, not because the other factors are not 
important, but because our mandate is to address questions of educational policy. While educational 
policy can have only limited effect on the operation of historical, social, political, and economic forces in 
the short term, it can have dramatic and immediate effects on results in the classroom which can 
eventually yield important social and economic benefits over the longer term. We consider our 
mandate, which is to focus on language policy in education in St. Eustatius, as important because 
educational policy is one of the things that can be changed relatively quickly and easily and the impact 
of these changes can make tangible, positive and measurable differences in educational outcomes 
within a relatively short time span. While we all agree that addressing many of the historical, social, 
political, and economic causes of the problems faced by the education system in St. Eustatius will 
require massive and comprehensive change at all levels of society over a long period of time, we are 
fortunate to be focusing on some of the causes whose eradication will require nothing more than some 
changes in educational policy and some reorientation of classroom practice. In other words, if we want 
to begin somewhere in addressing the problems in education in St. Eustatius, this is a logical and 
relatively manageable place to start. 
One of the underlying principles of modern education is that it is universal. This means that a modern 
education system such as that of St. Eustatius has as its official aim to equip all citizens with the abilities 
and skills that they need to lead satisfying and productive lives. The idea of universal education is a fairly 
recent one and among the countries which historically played a pioneering role in the establishment of 
universal education is the Netherlands. Before the 1800s, formal education was restricted to a very 
small elite class in the Netherlands and the rest of the world. One of the main educational policies and 
practices that ensured that education would remain the exclusive privilege of the elite ruling classes was 
16 | P a g e 
 

The soundness of this principle when applied to the language of initial instruction and literacy is 
graphically illustrated in the map in Figure 1 below:  
 
 
POPULATION WITHOUT ACCESS TO L1 EDUCATION: 
RED = MORE THAN 50% 
ORANGE = MORE THAN 10% 
Buy SmartDraw!- purchased copies print this 
document without a watermark .
Visit www.smartdraw.com or call 1-800-768-3729.
YELLOW = LESS THAN 10% 
 
Figure 1. Per cent of population in various countries without access to first language education (based 
on Faraclas 2011 and Ethnologue 2013) 
It is no coincidence that those countries where the students’ first language is used as the language of 
initial instruction and literacy are also those countries that have the most successful education systems 
and whose workforces are maximally equipped to achieve a high level of independent technological, 
scientific, and economic success. If the islands of the Lesser Antilles were big enough to be included on 
the map, a great many of them (including St. Eustatius) would be colored red, because the language of 
instruction and initial literacy in their schools is not a first language of the majority of their population. 
Some of the characteristics shared by St. Eustatius, many of the other Lesser Antilles, and the other red 
colored countries and territories in Figure 1 are: 1) very low levels of academic performance in public 
schools; 2) extremely high school attrition rates; 3) the effective exclusion of the majority of the 
population from access to the minimal degree of education sufficient for effective participation in the 
globalized economy; 4) the extreme concentration of wealth and educational opportunity among a very 
small elite class; and 5) excessive dependence on expatriate professionals and skilled (and even semi-
skilled) labor from the yellow and orange colored countries where the language of instruction in schools 
is that of the majority of the students. 
Instruction and initial literacy in one’s first language are not only a matter of good pedagogy, they have 
also been recognized and ratified as human rights. The declaration by UNESCO in 1953 that all children 
have the right to education in their first language has been followed by similar conventions agreed upon 
by the majority of the members of various international organizations. As illustrated below, increasing 
numbers of societies similar in one way or another to that of St. Eustatius, have been working toward 
18 | P a g e 
 

Vélez (1999) offers evidence from the 1990 census indicating that 20% of the Puerto Rican 
population is proficient in English, and another 20% can handle the language reasonably 
well (74).  
Similar figures can be found in the 2000 U.S. Census. Of those residents 5 years of age and 
over, only 15.9% believe that they have the ability to speak English “very well;” 17.9% 
report speaking English “well,” 21.0% report speaking it “not very well,” and 45.2% report 
not speaking it at all. If we add together those who claim to speak it “very well” and 
“well,” we see that only 33.8% consider themselves to be reasonably fluent in the English 
language and 66.2% consider they have problems speaking English. While self-report data 
have to be taken with a grain of salt due to the tendency of people to over- or under-
estimate their language abilities, the figures are still of concern to English teachers and 
language policymakers. 
Meyers provides the following concise history of language policy in Puerto Rican schools from 
1898 to 1948: 
To better understand the role English plays nowadays in Puerto Rico, let us take a quick 
look at the major events of the history of English in Puerto Rico (Pousada, 1996; Resnick, 
1993; Negrón de Montilla, 1970). 
1898 – Puerto Rico was yielded to the United States as part of the Treaty of Paris on 
December 10, 1898. 
1900-1904 – Brumbaugh policy: classes were taught in Spanish in Grades 1 – 8, and 
English was the medium of instruction in the few high schools that existed.  
1902—Official Languages Act declared Spanish and English the co-official languages of the 
government of Puerto Rico. 
1904-1916 – Falkner policy: English was the sole medium of instruction in all grades. This 
policy required teaching reading in English in the first grade, although the number of 
elementary school teachers who spoke English was limited.  
1916 -1934–Miller policy: Spanish was employed as the medium of instruction from the 
first to the fourth grade, Spanish and English, in the fifth grade, and English, from the sixth 
to the twelfth grade.  
1934-1947 – Padín & Gallardo policies: Spanish was the language of instruction from the 
first to the eighth grade, and English was taught as a subject. However, English served as 
the language of instruction from ninth grade to twelfth grade.  
1948 –Luis Muñoz Marín became the first elected governor of Puerto Rico. Under 
Commissioner MarianoVillaronga, Spanish was made the language of instruction in all 
grades, and English was taught as a required subject in all grades. This policy remains in 
effect today. (3-6)  
Meyers goes on to make the following observations regarding attitudes toward English in Puerto 
Rico: 
20 | P a g e 
 

Islanders) in Honduras from 2004 to 2010, all of whom had established preschools and primary schools 
in their local communities where children were being taught their own languages and cultures before 
transitioning into Spanish.  
As part of this initiative, a research study was carried out by community members themselves in 2007 to 
measure the impact that these programs were having on stakeholders, including students, parents, 
teachers, educational authorities, community leaders and cultural workers. Questionnaires were 
designed for each one of these target groups as well as a set of criteria for class observations. The 
sample included a total of 46 schools, some 400 students, 130 teachers, 400 parents, 40 educational 
authorities (headmasters, etc.), 40 leaders and cultural workers, and 60 class observations. 
By gauging the extent to which the program was being implemented in each school, and using the 
responses on the questionnaires and the class observations, a statistically significant set of results were 
obtained which indicated the extent to which the goals of the program were being achieved. Some of 
the more remarkable results are summarized in the tables below, where mucho refers to schools where 
the program was being implemented fully; bastante refers to schools where the program was being 
implemented substantially; algo refers to schools where the program was being implemented to a 
modest extent; poco refers to schools where the program was being implemented only slightly; and 
nada refers to schools where the program was not being implemented at all.  
As can be seen from Figure 2a below, the more local language and culture were being taught, the higher 
the levels of satisfaction with the educational process in general on the part of all of the stakeholders, 
while Figures 2b and 2c indicate that these results were statistically significant: 
 
LEVELS OF SATISFACTION
NIVELES DE SATISFACCION
 
22 | P a g e 
 

Figures 2b abd 2c. Statistical significance of correlations between levels of stakeholder satisfaction with 
the educational process in general and level of implementation of bilingual intercultural education 
programs. 
Figure 3a below demonstrates that the more local language and culture were being taught, the higher 
the levels of confidence and the lower the levels of fear on the part of students in the classroom, while 
Figure 3b indicates that these results were statistically significant: 
CONFIDENCE/AFFECTIVE FACTORS
CONFIANZA/FACTORES AFECTIVOS
 
Figure 3a. Correlation between levels of confidence and fear on the part of students in the classroom 
and level of implementation of bilingual intercultural education programs. 
24 | P a g e 
 

Figure 4a. Correlation between levels of parent involvement in their children’s education and level of 
implementation of bilingual intercultural education programs. 
PARTICIPATION OF PARENTS
PARTICIPACION DE MADRES/PADRES
A:Contento/Participación/Padres Correlación de Pearson
.402(*)
L:Contento/Participación/Padres Correlación de Pearson
.565(**)
M:Contento/Participación/Padres Correlación de Pearson
.451(**)
N:Padres Ayudan/Tareas/Clase Correlación de Pearson
.349(*)
P:Colabora/Niño en Tareas/Clase Correlación de Pearson
.276
P:Asiste Reuniones/Padres/Familia Correlación de Pearson
.384(**)
 
Figure 4b. Statistical significance of correlations between levels of parent involvement in their children’s 
education and level of implementation of bilingual intercultural education programs. 
These and the other results obtained indicate the multidimensional benefits of first language education, 
which include a better grasp of sound-symbol correspondence at the cognitive level; a more pro-active 
approach to learning at the level of agency; a more pleasureful association with learning at the affective 
level; a greater sense of ease in learning at the level of fluency; a greater sense of confidence in learning 
at the psychological level; maximal chances for grasping content at the level of comprehension; less 
mechanical and rote learning at the creative level; and greater motivation for learning as one success 
leads to another, are summarized in Figure 5 below: 
26 | P a g e 
 

As in most of the other countries where the language of instruction is not a first language of the 
students (including St. Eustatius), the curriculum in Papua New Guinea focuses on the language and 
culture of the imperial power that colonized the country (English-speaking Australia) rather than on 
those of the students. As a result, while most students learn very little about mathematics, language, 
social studies and science because these subjects are all taught in a language that they do not 
understand, they do learn one basic lesson: that their own culture and language are inferior and not 
worthy of being taught in school, and therefore should be rejected. (see stakeholder Interview section 
below and Ahai & Faraclas 1993; Faraclas 1994; 1996; 1998b) 
The result is that most students turn away from their own language and culture without having the 
opportunity to properly master the foreign language and culture that is being taught to them in school. 
This has produced generations of young people who are no longer able and/or willing to play a 
productive role in their traditional cultures and societies, but who are not equipped with the language, 
culture, and diplomas necessary to go to an urban center or abroad and play a productive role in a more 
globalized culture and society. Just as in St. Eustatius, crime, drug abuse, prostitution, early pregnancies 
and other social problems that were previously relatively rare, have become alarmingly common since 
young people have had access to formal education in a language that is not their own and who neither 
fit into the traditional culture that they have been taught to despise or into the globalized culture that 
they have been taught to worship.  
As shown in Figure 6 below, the typical outcomes of instruction and initial literacy in a language that is 
not one of the students’ first languages include: 
1) Defensive Enculturation, whereby students defensively retreat into their home culture and 
language and xenophobically reject all other cultures and languages (in St. Eustatius, as 
elsewhere, this normally accounts for the small percentage of students who are forced out of 
school during the earliest years) 
2) Alienating Adculturation, whereby students reject their own culture and language and 
assimilate as well as they can to a foreign culture and language (in St. Eustatius, as elsewhere, 
this normally accounts for the very low percentage - typically 5% - of students who actually 
succeed in public schools where the language of instruction is not their first language) 
3) Deculturation, whereby students reject their own culture and language, and don’t succeed in 
assimilating to a foreign culture and language either (in St. Eustatius, as elsewhere, this 
typically accounts for the majority of students in schools where the language of instruction is 
not their first language) 
These negative outcomes contrast with the goal of first language instruction programs in Papua New 
Guinea and elsewhere, which is to provide students with a firm appreciation for their own culture and 
language which gives them the basis to eventually go on to learn and practice other cultural and 
linguistic repertoires (including the national language) from a position of strength, rather than from a 
position of weakness. 
28 | P a g e 
 

The Enga Tokples Priskul was controlled by the community, with little or no funding from outside of the 
community and no approval at all from the government. This program used the community’s own ‘push-
outs’ as literacy teachers, and books that were written and printed by the community members 
themselves. Once the first students completed the one year program at the Enga Tokples Priskul, their 
parents once again went against the dictates and policies of the National Department of Education, and 
established special bridging classes for their children during the first three grades of public primary 
school, where the children would gradually transition from their own Enga language as language of 
instruction and literacy to English as language of instruction and literacy. In this way, the children at the 
local school were divided into two groups or tracks: 1) The Enga Tokples Priskul Group, i.e. those who 
had attended the Enga Tokples Priskul for one year and then attended special transition classes in 
Grades 1-3 before entering English-only classes in Grades 4-6; and 2) The English-only Group, i.e. those 
who had no preschooling, and who attended English-only classes from Grades 1-6, as prescribed by the 
National Department of Education. Since the Grade 1-3 transition classes were given in both Enga and 
English, by the time the Enga Tokples Priskul Group students had completed Grade 6, they had had only 
4.5 years of English instruction during 7 years at school, while the English-only Group had received 6 full 
years of English instruction during 6 years at school. 
The parents and teachers of the Enga Tokples Priskul Group were so impressed by the extraordinary 
progress of these students, that they decided to test them in English language skills at the end of Grade 
4, after only 1.5 years of English instruction. Even at this early stage, their results were superior to those 
of the Grade 4 students of the English-only Group. Some critics pointed out that these differences could 
have been due to the fact that by Grade 4, the Enga Tokples Priskul Group would have had a total of 5 
years of schooling (including the preschool year) versus the English-only Group’s total of 4 years. To 
control for this difference, the Grade 5 students who were enrolled in regular English-only classes at the 
school also took the test. The results from the Enga Tokples Priskul Group Grade 4 students were also 
superior to the results obtained for the Grade 5 English-only students. 
But the real test of the results of the Enga Tokples Priskul Group was the national secondary school 
entrance examination given at the end of Grade 6, where students are tested in English for their 
competence in language skills, mathematics, social studies and the sciences. As stated above, only 20% 
of students normally pass this test, and the passing rate for English-only Group students was roughly at 
this 20% level, that is, only 20% were allowed to proceed to secondary school. But the results for the 
Enga Tokples Priskul Group were among the highest ever to be achieved in the history of the test, 
approaching 80%. Once the success of the Enga Tokples Priskul project became known, other 
communities began to gain enough confidence to initiate similar projects, and within a decade over one 
thousand Papua New Guinean communities had started local language preschools, using their own 
languages, cultures and resources. 
In Papua New Guinea as in most of the other nations worldwide where first language education 
programs are being initiated, children who attend preschool in their own language and go on to primary 
school in English progress more quickly than children who do not start in their own language. The 
children who go through the local language literacy preschools not only have a better appreciation for 
their own culture, but they also do much better than other students once they go on to the formal 
30 | P a g e 
 

Prins-Winkel (1983) makes the following disturbing observations about the situation in Curaçao, which is 
strikingly similar to the situation in St. Eustatius (see stakeholder Interview section below): 
[A]ttention was focussed on the relatively few, who –astonishingly enough!- did succeed: 
probably aided by intelligence, linguistic abilities, endurance, good memory, a healthy 
disposition and above all: aided by more or less educated parents or acquaintances, with at least 
some knowledge of Dutch, who were in a position to rightly stimulate and motivate their 
children. The greater part of Antillean children were not so fortunate ... (14)  
 
The myth of educational advantages through using Dutch in schools in the course of time 
unmistakably took hold of the people’s imagination; the privileged few, who did surpass the 
obstacles and did succeed, those who later on had access to good jobs, important positions or 
brilliant careers, the ones pertaining to that lucky minority became the examples everyone 
wanted to follow; the masses of less successful children, who failed because of that same 
educational system and did not have any advantages, were often rebuked for their hardships, 
punished at home for being stubborn and they had to suffer their sorrows in loneliness (12) 
Following such world renowned authorities in language policy and pedagogy as Krashen (1985) and 
Cummins & Swain (1986: 87), Beheydt (2012: 110) observes that sufficient contact with the target 
language and sufficient motivation are the two main factors in language learning, and that sufficient 
contact with Dutch and sufficient motivation to learn Dutch are lacking in Aruba (as is also the case in 
the other ABC Islands and in St. Eustatius, see Interviews section below). Severing & Verhoeven (1995) 
indicate that Dutch is increasingly becoming a foreign language for students in Curaçao. Narain (1995) 
explicitly states that Dutch is not a first or second language in Curaçao and that the education system 
should therefore not continue to teach Dutch as if it were the students’ first or second language. She 
argues against the use of textbooks in Curaçao which are imported from the European Netherlands for 
teaching Dutch as a second language to non-native speakers of Dutch there, because while for 
immigrants living in the European Netherlands Dutch is a second language, for students in the Caribbean 
(including St. Eustatius) Dutch is a foreign language. Narain observes that there are hardly any 
possibilities for students in Curaçao to use Dutch in a setting of natural interaction outside the 
classroom (this could also be said for St. Eustatius, see Attitude and use survey and Interview sections 
below).  
In a longitudinal study investigating the language development in Papiamentu/o and Dutch of 80 
children 4 to 6 years of age living in Curaçao, Narain (1995) assessed the students by means of a 
language test measuring phonological, lexical, syntactic and textual abilities in Papiamentu/o and Dutch. 
The results showed that significant progress takes place during the kindergarten period, but the 
acquisition process in Dutch is much slower than in Papiamentu/o. During the whole kindergarten 
period infants in Curaçao were strongest in their own language on all linguistic levels. The initial 
competence of the children in their mother tongue played a crucial role in their further linguistic and 
development, not only in Papiamentu/o, but also in Dutch.  
32 | P a g e 
 

The study reported on in Severing & Verhoeven (1995) and Severing (1997) presents the results of a 
language proficiency assessment of 200 grade 5 (groep 7) children living in Curaçao. The assessment 
consisted of word-decoding tasks as well as language comprehension tasks related to lexicon, syntax 
(sentence comprehension) and semantics (text comprehension). The results show that the 
comprehension levels of the children are clearly better in Papiamentu/o as compared to Dutch. The 
authors observe that these results are remarkable as the students receive less instruction in their 
mother tongue (150 minutes of Papiamentu/o per week, as compared to 270-300 minutes of Dutch. 
Dutch is also the instruction language for all other subjects). The level of decoding, however, was clearly 
higher in Dutch. According to the authors this difference can be explained by the education system, as 
students initially develop reading and writing skills in Dutch and start two years later with the 
development of these skills in Papiamentu/o. Dutch is also taught more systematically and consistently 
over the years. The levels of proficiency in both languages, but especially in Dutch, were found to be 
related to background factors of students (grade repeat status, reading behaviour, language attitude, 
learning capacity) and their families (socio-economic status, home language and language provision at 
home).  
Efforts have been underway for some time to establish programs for instruction and initial literacy in 
Papiamentu/o in the ABC Islands. As in St. Eustatius, some school boards, some schools, and some 
individual teachers have been more pro-active in this process than others. Traditionally, in pre-primary 
education and vocational education (EIB) Papiamentu/o has been used as the language of instruction. In 
Curaçao, about half of the primary schools have institutionalized the use of Papiamentu/o as language 
of instruction and initial literacy, while the other half remain officially Dutch-only, although in practice 
Papiamentu/o is used by many teachers to explain material in Dutch to the students. In Aruba, there are 
a handful of pilot schools where Papiamentu/o has become the official language of instruction and initial 
literacy under the Scol Multilingual project, which aims to eventually transition to Dutch and ensure 
literacy in Spanish and English (which are strong first and second languages in Aruba) as well. At the 
secondary level, Papiamentu/o is taught as a subject as part of a Dutch-dominant curriculum in all public 
schools except for the Kolegio Erasmo on Curaçao, where Papiamentu/o is used as language of 
instruction at all levels from pre-primary to the end of secondary. 
6. The transition from Kiswahili to English in Tanzanian secondary schools 
In Tanzania, the language of instruction and initial literacy in primary schools is Kiswahili, which is a first 
or second language of the majority of the population. In secondary schools, however, a transition is 
made from Kiswahili to English as language of instruction. Just as is the case in St. Eustatius and the ABC 
Islands, this transition is a difficult one. Brock-Utne (2010) argues that English as a language of 
instruction in Tanzanian education serves as a barrier for the learning of subject matter for millions of 
Tanzanian students. In order to help the students understand content taught in English, teachers are 
forced to employ strategies like code-mixing, code-switching and full translation of texts from English to 
Kiswahili. The use of these strategies slows down the pace of learning of subject matter, makes it 
difficult for teachers to cover the syllabus and does not expand the vocabulary of the children in the 
language of instruction. When exams are being taken, these strategies are prohibited by the school 
authorities. A student who answers a question posed in English correctly but in Kiswahili will be given 
34 | P a g e 
 

2 LEVELS OF LANGUAGE SKILL:
1: INFORMAL COMPETENCE (IC) 
2: ACADEMIC COMPETENCE (AC)
• AC Academic Competence
• IC Informal Competence
– Formal Discussion
– Casual Conversation
– Formal Presentations
– Basic Explanations
– Scientific Vocabulary
– Core Vocabulary
– Multi-Level Analysis
– Literal Understanding 
– Technical Writing Skills
– Basic Writing Skills
– Many Students Lack 
– Most Students Have 
Academic Competence in 
Casual Competence in 
Any Language
at Least 1 Language
 
Figure 7. Informal Competence vs. Academic Competence (Cummins 2000) 
Figure 8 below illustrates Cummin’s Threshold Theory, which schematizes the different possible 
outcomes of education in a situation where the official language of instruction is not one of the 
students’ first languages as a house with three floors or three thresholds:  
CUMMINS ’ (2000) THRESHOLD HYPOTHESIS: GOAL
OF L1 EDUCATION BALANCED BI-LINGUALISM
SATISFACTORY LEVELS OF IC AND AC IN BOTH LGS.
RD
3 FLOOR: BALANCED BILINGUALISM
ADDITIVE BILINGUALISM
SATISFACTORY LEVELS OF IC AND AC IN 1 LG.
UNSATISFACTORY LEVELS IN THE OTHER LG.
ND
2 FLOOR: DOMINANT BILINGUALISM
INADEQUATE LEVELS IN BOTH LGS.
ST
1 FLOOR: LIMITED BILINGUALISM
SUBTRACTIVE BILINGUALISM
 
Figure 8. Cummins’ (2000) Threshold Theory 
36 | P a g e 
 

7. First language education in Dutch in Flanders 
Kas Deprez (2000: 22) mentions three main motivational factors for the shift in language policy in the 
Flanders region of Belgium from French, traditionally the language of formal education in Belgium, to 
Dutch, the first language of the majority of the people of the region. One motivation is a matter of 
modernity. In modern societies, states are obliged to organize a system of education which is maximally 
accessible to every child and, just as in St. Eustatius, instruction and literacy in a language that is not a 
first language of the students excludes most from the educational process. The second motivation is the 
promotion of Dutch as part of the emancipation of the Flemish people as a group after a period of 
domination in which French had been the language of power, (just as Dutch has been the language of 
power in St. Eustatius). Thirdly, the option to adopt territoriality as an organizational principle was 
inspired by practical motives of keeping French speaking Wallonia and Dutch speaking Flanders together 
by recognizing their diversity. Interestingly, the Belgian government has recognized that the best way to 
ensure that people appreciate and learn each other’s languages and cultures is to give them the chance 
to gain a strong foundation in their own language and culture first, before they go on to learn those of 
another group. Cuvelier (2003) states that: 
one could say that Flanders and Belgium have been experiencing a development away from an 
apparently homogeneous system in which the standard variety of Dutch/French was legally 
recognised as the one medium. Recent developments focus more on individual people’s 
capacities and needs and on the growing recognition of linguistic and cultural diversity …. At the 
same time, however, at the level of micro-sociolinguistics, the language use of individuals in 
particular circumstances has been modifying the ideology of multilingualism and is gradually 
determining new language policies. (45) 
It is interesting to note that the shift in Flanders from French to Dutch has been a complete shift. In 
other words, Flemish children have the benefit of Dutch as their language of instruction in public schools 
from kindergarten until the end of secondary school. There is no transition from the students’ first 
language (Dutch) to another language (French) as language of instruction at Grade 3, Grade 5, or Grade 
7 as there is in St. Eustatius and other countries where first language education is being implemented 
for the first time. 
The Flemish and Puerto Rican cases discussed, confirm that the pedagogically optimal and politically 
enlightened right to a full public education in their first language would help offer the people of St. 
Eustatius an opportunity to avoid the risk of alarming educational failure rates, rampant social problems, 
increasing economic dependence, and political resentment toward the European Netherlands and all 
things Dutch in the not so distant future. The English speaking population on the neighboring island of 
Saba has already made this right a reality in their education system, with predominantly positive effects 
on the academic performance of their students. If St. Eustatius follows the model of its smallest 
neighbor Saba, it can avoid the language policy blunders of its largest neighbor Puerto Rico. 
  
38 | P a g e 
 

The questionnaires for students were filled out by both primary and secondary students in group 
sessions in their regular classrooms, in the presence of their teachers and the team members. The team 
members introduced themselves to the students and briefly explained the purpose of their visit. In the 
group sessions with primary education students, one member of the research team went through the 
questionnaire, explaining the individual statements and questions, to make sure that the students had 
no problem with their interpretation. The other research team members assisted individual students 
when necessary. In general students at both the primary and secondary levels were very cooperative 
and capable of filling out the questionnaire. Completed questionnaires were placed by participants in a 
cardboard box, to guarantee their anonymity.  
The questionnaires for teachers were generally filled out during focus group meetings, questionnaires 
for parents were distributed to all parents with a cover letter (as included in Appendix 1.5 ) and later 
collected by the schools; and questionnaires for other stakeholders were filled out either during focus 
group meetings or independently. During the second visit of the team there was a central drop off point 
at the RCN/OCW office, where stakeholders could leave their completed survey forms anonymously in a 
mailbox especially designed for the purpose.  
Table 0 contains a complete overview of the stakeholders who participated in the survey. The group 
numbers correspond to the chronological order in which the questionnaires were collected by the team 
during their second visit. Additionally, each questionnaire was numbered individually to facilitate data 
processing.  
  
40 | P a g e 
 

3. Results 
3.1 Demographic characteristics of the participants 
3.1.1 Students in primary education 
The questionnaire was filled out by 97 students in primary education, corresponding to 18 students 
from Governor de Graaff School, 27 students from the Seventh Day Adventist School, 35 students from 
Bethel Methodist School and 17 students from Golden Rock School. Some of their demographic 
characteristics are presented in Table 1.  
Age  Sex  Groep 
10 12,4 %  Male 50,5 %  7 46,4 % 
11 45,4 %  Female 48,5 %  8 50,5 % 
12 41,2 %       
13 1 %       
Birthplaces   
Birthplace student Statia: 47,4% Outside Statia: 52,6%  
Birthplace mother Statia: 37,1 % Outside Statia: 61,9 % Unknown: 1,0 % 
Birthplace father Statia: 35,1 % Outside Statia: 61,9 % Unknown: 3,1 % 
Table 1: Demographic characteristics of students in primary education 
As the data in Table 1 indicate, the number of participants is quite equally spread over males 
and females, as well as over the two grades groep 7 (primary Grade 5) and groep 8 (primary 
Grade 6). Most of the students are 11 or 12 years old and the majority of the students as well as 
their parents were born outside St. Eustatius. A closer look at the birthplaces mentioned in the 
questionnaires reveals that only 28,3% of the students who were born in St. Eustatius have two 
parents who were born on the island as well.  
3.1.2 Students in secondary education 
The questionnaire was filled out by 98 students in secondary education from Gwendoline van Putten 
School. Table 2 presents the number of students according to the different years and tracks.  
Year Level Number of informants 
Schakelklas  32 
Year 1 VMBO-k/VMBO-t 13  
 HAVO 20 
Year 2 VMBO-b 8 
Year 3 VMBO-t 12 
 HAVO 13 
Table 2: Students in secondary education who participated in the survey, according to year and 
education level/track 
42 | P a g e 
 

3.1.5 Teachers 
40 teachers filled out the questionnaire, corresponding to 3 teachers from Governor de Graaff School, 5 
teachers from the Seventh Day Adventist School, 9 teachers from Bethel Methodist School, 2 teachers 
from Golden Rock School and 17 teachers from Gwendoline van Putten School. 4 questionnaires were 
filed anonymously by teachers at the RCN/OCW office.  
Table 4 presents an summary of information about the birthplaces of the teachers. 70% of the teachers 
(n=28) were born outside St. Eustatius and only 15 % (n=6) were born on the island. 15% of the teachers 
(n=6) did not mention their birthplace in the questionnaire. It is relevant to point out that 45% of the 
teachers who participated in the survey were born in Holland. 
  
Birthplace  Percentage (number) 
St. Eustatius 15% (n=6) 
Holland 45% (n=18) 
Surinam 10% (n=4) 
ABC-islands 3% (n=1) 
Elsewhere in Caribbean 13% (n=5) 
Elsewhere outside Caribbean 0% (n=0) 
Unknown 15% (n=6) 
Total 100% (n=40) 
Table 4: Birthplaces of the teachers who participated in the survey.  
3.1.6 Members of the General public 
The survey included 33 questionnaires filled out by the general public. Most of these questionnaires 
were anonymously filed at the RCN/OCW office. In this part of the analysis we also included 8 
questionnaires filled out by daily visitors to the Recreational Center for the elderly and 3 questionnaires 
from Edupartners, a center which provides professional services to the schools. 33% of the participants 
(n=11) were born in St. Eustatius, a majority of 58% (n=19) was born outside the island and 9% (n=3) did 
not mention their birthplace in the questionnaire. The education level of the members of the general 
public included low (n=10), medium (n=6) and high (n=12); 5 members of the general public left the 
question regarding their level of education unanswered..  
3.2 Language use 
This part of the report presents data concerning the daily use of the main languages spoken in St. 
Eustatius by the different groups of participants: students of primary education, students of secondary 
education, parents of students in primary education, parents of students in secondary education, 
teachers and the general public.  
Notice that the participants were able to mark several languages for each conversational partner. 
Hence, the percentages in each cell represent the percentages of participants who confirmed the use of 
that particular language in conversations with each particular partner listed in the questionnaire.  
44 | P a g e 
 

 
 Standard Another 
Which language(s) do you use Statian 
/school Dutch Spanish language: 
every day when you talk to... English 
English ... 
38. your mother 66,3 % 19,4 % 33,7 % 29,6 % 10,2 % 
39. your father 65,3 % 20,4 % 22,4 % 20,4 % 10,2 % 
40. your brothers and sisters 83,7 % 15,3 % 22,4 % 19,4 % 6,1 % 
41.  your friends  88,8 % 9,2 % 12,2 % 14,3 % 8,2 % 
42.  your teachers 44,9 % 41,8 % 69,4 % 11,2 % 3,1 % 
43. your class mates 90,8 % 14,3 % 19,4 % 9,2 % 5,1 % 
44. Strangers 60,2 % 42,9 % 29,6 % 13,3 % 9,2 % 
Table 6: Language use by students in secondary education 
 
 Which language(s) do you use Statian Standard Dutch Spanish Another 
every day when you talk to... English /school language: ... 
English 
36. your mother 
56,6% 31,9% 18,6% 13,3% 10,6% 
37. your father 
50,4% 29,2% 15,0% 8,0% 8,8% 
38. your brothers and sisters 
63,7% 31,0% 14,2% 8,8% 9,7% 
39.  your friends  
67,3% 36,3% 25,7% 13,3% 19,5% 
40.  your colleagues at work 
53,1% 45,1% 27,4% 13,3% 15,0% 
41. your colleagues outside work 
52,2% 34,5% 20,4% 11,5% 15,9% 
42.  Strangers 
38,1% 62,8% 27,4% 16,8% 14,2% 
Table 7: Language use by parents of students in primary education  
 
 Which language(s) do you use Statian Standard Dutch Spanish Another 
every day when you talk to... English /school language: ... 
English 
36. your mother 
54,2% 39,6% 10,4% 12,5% 8,3% 
37. your father 
41,7% 33,3% 8,3% 10,4% 10,4% 
38. your brothers and sisters 
64,6% 29,2% 12,5% 6,3% 12,5% 
39.  your friends  
72,9% 47,9% 12,5% 16,7% 8,3% 
40.  your colleagues at work 
50,0% 58,3% 29,2% 8,3% 10,4% 
41. your colleagues outside work 
47,9% 47,9% 25,0% 14,6% 12,5% 
42.  Strangers 
31,3% 70,8% 29,2% 20,8% 14,6% 
Table 8: Language use by parents of students in secondary education  
  
46 | P a g e 
 

As Tables 11-16 indicate, there is a strong consensus about the domains in which the participants 
consider Dutch to be important for the people in Statia. The highest percentages are found in four 
categories and their ranking is very similar across the six groups of participants: (i) passing tests, (ii) 
earning money & getting a job, (iii) reading & writing and (iv) raising children. The percentages are 
slightly higher for student respondents and slightly lower for parents of students in secondary education 
and teachers, but the overall pattern is consistent. Hence, Dutch is an important language in St. 
Eustatius for instrumental purposes, related to education and the job market. Dutch is less or not 
important for integrative functions related to social activities within the community, such as making 
friends, being liked and talking on the phone. 
 
 How important do you think Important Rather Less Not Mean SD 
Dutch is for people in Statia for important important important 
28. making friends  31,3 % 16,7 % 21,9 % 30,2 % 2,51 1,22 
29. earning money & getting a job 84,4 % 6,3 % 3,1 % 6,3 % 1,31 0,81 
30. reading & writing  70,2 % 21,3 % 4,3 % 4,3 % 1,43 0,77 
31. watching TV 10,6 % 16,0 % 26,6 % 46,8 % 3,10 1,03 
32. using the internet 26,6 % 22,3 % 14,9 % 36,2 % 2,61 1,23 
33. talking on the phone 23,7 % 12,9 % 23,7 % 39,8 % 2,80 1,21 
34. being liked 27,1 % 16,7 % 18,8 % 37,5 % 2,67 1,24 
35.  living in Statia 35,1 % 25,8 % 16,5 % 22,7 % 2,27 1,17 
36. raising children  51,0 % 21,9 % 9,4 % 17,7 % 1,94 1,15 
37.  passing tests 90,7 % 6,2 % 1,0 % 2,1 % 1,14 0,52 
Table 11: The importance of Dutch according to students in primary education 
 
 How important do you think Important Rather Less Not Mean SD 
Dutch is for people in Statia for important important important 
28. making friends  9,3 % 25,8 % 32,0 % 33,0 % 2,89 0,98 
29. earning money & getting a job 76,8 % 20,0 % 3,2 % 0 % 1,26 0,51 
30. reading & writing  61,1 % 27,4 % 8,4 % 3,2 % 1,54 0,78 
31. watching TV 8,2 % 17,3 % 41,8 % 32,7 % 2,99 0,91 
32. using the internet 21,6 % 21,6 % 29,9 % 26,8 % 2,62 1,10 
33. talking on the phone 14,4 % 21,6 % 34,0 % 29,9 % 2,79 1,03 
34. being liked 10,2 % 13,3 % 31,6 % 44,9 % 3,11 0,99 
35.  living in Statia 18,4 % 29,6 % 22,4 % 29,6 % 2,63 1,10 
36. raising children  27,6 % 30,6 % 16,3 % 25,5 % 2,40 1,15 
37.  passing tests 86,7 % 12,2 % 1,0 % 0 % 1,14 0,38 
Table 12: The importance of Dutch according to students in secondary education 
 
48 | P a g e 
 

 
 How important do you think Important Rather Less Not Mean SD 
Dutch is for people in Statia for important important important 
27. making friends  10,0% 12,5% 37,5% 40,0% 3,11 0,98 
28. earning money & getting a job 40,0% 40,0% 15,0% 5,0% 1,87 0,88 
29. reading & writing  41,0% 30,8% 23,1% 5,1% 1,95 0,93 
30. watching TV 10,3% 5,1% 43,6% 41,0% 3,13 0,93 
31. using the internet 5,3% 2,6% 50,0% 42,1% 3,30 0,78 
32. talking on the phone 10,5% 10,5% 52,6% 26,3% 2,97 0,90 
33. being liked 10,5% 7,9% 36,8% 44,7% 3,14 0,98 
34. living in Statia 10,5% 28,9% 28,9% 31,6% 2,84 1,01 
35.  raising children  25,6% 28,2% 25,6% 20,5% 2,42 1,11 
36. passing tests 71,1% 15,8% 7,9% 5,3% 1,49 0,87 
Table 15: The importance of Dutch according to teachers 
 
 How important do you think Important Rather Less Not Mean SD 
Dutch is for people in Statia for important important important 
26. making friends  40,6% 12,5% 21,9% 25,0% 2,31 1,26 
27. earning money & getting a job 64,5% 19,4% 16,1% 0,0% 1,52 0,77 
28. reading & writing  70,0% 16,7% 6,7% 6,7% 1,50 0,90 
29. watching TV 30,0% 23,3% 26,7% 20,0% 2,37 1,13 
30. using the internet 30,0% 20,0% 33,3% 16,7% 2,37 1,10 
31. talking on the phone 32,3% 25,8% 29,0% 12,9% 2,23 1,06 
32. being liked 23,3% 16,7% 26,7% 33,3% 2,70 1,18 
33. living in Statia 35,5% 22,6% 25,8% 16,1% 2,23 1,12 
34. raising children  41,9% 32,3% 12,9% 12,9% 1,97 1,05 
35.  passing tests 84,4% 12,5% 0,0% 3,1% 1,22 0,61 
Table 16: The importance of Dutch according to members of the general public 
3.4 Attitudes toward language and education 
3.4.1 Introduction 
This section discusses the results of the first part of the questionnaire about attitudes toward languages 
and education. For ease of exposition, we present the results in different sections, combining the 
relevant questions of the respective questionnaires. Notice that we reduced the presentation of the 
percentages of all the questionnaires to a three-point scale in the overviews of this section, by 
combining the percentages of strongly agree (1) and agree (2), and those of strongly disagree (4) and 
disagree (5). For a complete overview of the original percentages in a five-point scale we refer readers 
to Appendix 2.1 – 2.6. Comments made by the respondents can be found in Appendix 2.7. 
50 | P a g e 
 

 Question Agree Neutral Disagree Mean SD 
2. I feel strong ties with the Netherlands 44,3% 29,2% 26,4% 2,77 1,12 
5.  I am critical about the Netherlands 37,1% 38,1% 24,8% 2,79 1,01 
8. Dutch is a difficult language to learn 43,0% 6,5% 50,5% 3,05 1,28 
11. I like hearing Dutch spoken 63,6% 28,2% 8,2% 2,31 0,88 
13. It is a waste of time to learn Dutch 4,5% 8,9% 86,6% 4,18 0,87 
17. I would like to improve my skills in Dutch 79,8% 14,9% 5,3% 1,99 0,86 
Table 19: Attitudes toward Dutch language and identity on the part of parents of students in primary 
education  
 Question Agree Neutral Disagree Mean SD 
2. I feel strong ties with the Netherlands 39,1% 34,8% 26,1% 2,85 1,05 
5.  I am critical about the Netherlands 62,2% 20,0% 17,8% 2,29 1,12 
8. Dutch is a difficult language to learn 51,1% 13,3% 35,6% 2,84 1,30 
11. I like hearing Dutch spoken 47,8% 37,0% 15,2% 2,63 0,95 
13. It is a waste of time to learn Dutch  2,1% 19,1% 78,7% 4,06 0,84 
17. I would like to improve my skills in Dutch 78,3% 8,7% 13,0% 2,20 0,93 
Table 20: Attitudes toward Dutch language and identity on the part of parents of students in secondary 
education  
 Question Agree Neutral Disagree Mean SD 
2. I feel strong ties with the Netherlands 48,7% 38,5% 12,8% 2,50 1,06 
6. I am critical about the Netherlands 60,5% 23,7% 15,8% 2,53 0,98 
9. Dutch is a difficult language to learn 32,5% 20,0% 47,5% 3,21 0,96 
12. I like hearing Dutch spoken 82,5% 17,5% 0,0% 2,00 0,62 
14. It is a waste of time to learn Dutch 5,0% 0,0% 95,0% 4,37 0,85 
18. I would like to improve my skills in Dutch 62,2% 18,9% 18,9% 2,34 1,16 
Table 21: Attitudes toward Dutch language and identity on the part of teachers 
 Question Agree Neutral Disagree Mean SD 
2. I feel strong ties with the Netherlands 50,0% 20,0% 30,0% 2,83 1,15 
5.  I am critical about the Netherlands 59,3% 29,6% 11,1% 2,48 1,12 
8. Dutch is a difficult language to learn 46,7% 6,7% 46,7% 3,00 1,26 
11. I like hearing Dutch spoken 67,7% 22,6% 9,7% 2,19 1,01 
13. It is a waste of time to learn Dutch  20,7% 6,9% 72,4% 3,79 1,35 
17. I would like to improve my skills in Dutch 90,6% 0,0% 9,4% 1,75 0,98 
Table 22: Attitudes toward Dutch language and identity on the part of members of the general public 
3.4.3 Attitudes toward standard/school English 
As Tables 23-28 indicate, attitudes toward English are positive. A majority of participants in all categories 
like speaking standard/school English, although students in primary education show slightly more 
neutral scores. Also a majority in all categories would like to improve their skills in standard/school 
English.  
52 | P a g e 
 

feeling free to express oneself in Dutch in the categories of students in secondary education and their 
parents, but students generally do not seem to get mad and act out when classes are not in English. 
Only a minority in all categories thinks that students like textbooks in Dutch. The majority of the adults 
agree with the statement that parents have trouble helping their children with homework in Dutch.  
From these data we conclude that participants consider the development of reading and writing skills in 
Dutch very important, but point out several problems with the present situation, as students have 
problems expressing themselves, do not like Dutch textbooks and –in particular according to adults- 
parents have trouble helping their children with homework. Attitudes are more negative among the 
categories who experience a Dutch-only education system on a daily basis: students in secondary 
education and their parents. These two categories are also less positive about studying in a Dutch 
speaking country.  
  Yes Neutral No Mean SD 
9.  I think that school should teach me to read 82,3 % 6,3 % 11,5 % 1,29 0,66 
and write in Dutch 
14.  When I am older I would like to study 53,7 % 18,9 % 27,4 % 1,74 0,87 
overseas in a country where people speak 
Dutch  
17.  In classes where the teacher speaks Dutch, I 39,4 % 28,7 % 31,9 % 1,93 0,85 
feel free to express myself 
18. When my homework is in Dutch, my parents 27,8 % 20,6 % 51,5 % 2,24 0,86 
have trouble helping me 
22. I feel uncomfortable speaking Dutch in my 38,5 % 14,6 %  46,9 % 2,08 0,93 
classes 
23. When classes are not in English I sometimes 21,9 % 19,8 % 58,3 % 2,36 0,82 
get mad and act out 
26. I like textbooks in Dutch 46,9 % 22,9 % 30,2 % 1,83 0,87 
Table 29: Attitudes toward education in Dutch on the part of students in primary education (based on a 
three-point scale) 
  
54 | P a g e 
 

 
 Question Agree Neutral Disagree Mean SD 
11. I think Statian schools should teach students 89,2% 5,4% 5,4% 1,92 0,84 
to read and write in Dutch 
16. I would encourage students to study abroad 59,0% 35,9% 5,1% 2,38 0,72 
in a Dutch speaking country 
19. When I speak Dutch in class students feel 43,2% 24,3% 32,4% 2,89 1,14 
free to express themselves 
20. When homework is in Dutch the parents 59,5% 21,6% 18,9% 2,47 0,97 
have trouble helping the students 
25. Students like textbooks in Dutch 15,4% 35,9% 48,7% 3,41 0,86 
Table 33: Attitudes toward education in Dutch on the part of teachers 
 
 Question Agree Neutral Disagree Mean SD 
10. I think Statian schools should teach students 93,5% 3,2% 3,2% 1,55 0,85 
to read and write in Dutch 
15. would encourage students to study abroad 61,3% 29,0% 9,7% 2,29 1,01 
in a Dutch speaking country 
18. When teachers speak Dutch in class students 30,0% 36,7% 33,3% 2,90 1,12 
feel free to express themselves 
19. When homework is in Dutch the parents 70,0% 13,3% 16,7% 2,17 1,32 
have trouble helping the students 
24. Students like textbooks in Dutch 30,0% 43,3% 26,7% 2,90 0,99 
Table 34: Attitudes toward education in Dutch on the part of members of the general public 
3.4.5 Attitudes toward education in English 
In Tables 35-40 we see that the majority of the participants thinks that schools in St. Eustatius should 
develop reading and writing skills in English, in particular the older generations. As these categories 
were also strong advocates of teaching reading and writing in Dutch, we conclude that adults in 
particular would welcome an education system leading to a strong academic competence in both 
languages. 
Students in primary and secondary education feel comfortable speaking English in their classes and a 
majority of them like English textbooks. These attitudes are shared by their parents, teachers and the 
general public. A comparison with the data from the previous section indicates that students feel more 
comfortable speaking English in their classes (mean score primary education: 1,14, mean score 
secondary education: 1,67) than speaking Dutch (mean score primary education: 1,93, mean score 
secondary education: 2,98). Hence, it is not surprising that they would like teachers to speak English 
more in class, although the percentage of agreement (39,6%) is not as high in the case of students in 
primary education (presumably due to the fact that their teachers use English as the main language of 
instruction). 
56 | P a g e 
 

 Question Agree Neutral Disagree Mean SD 
9. I think Statian schools should teach students 77,9% 10,6% 11,5% 2,05 1,03 
to read and write in English 
14. I would encourage students to study abroad 37,3% 22,7% 40,0% 3,02 1,17 
in an English speaking country 
22. Students want teachers to speak more 53,6% 23,2% 23,2% 2,57 1,04 
English in class 
23. Students like textbooks in English 67,0% 27,5% 5,5% 2,25 0,76 
Table 37: Attitudes toward education in English on the part of parents of students in primary education  
 
 Question Agree Neutral Disagree Mean SD 
9. I think Statian schools should teach students 83,3% 8,3% 8,3% 1,81 0,91 
to read and write in English 
14. I would encourage students to study abroad 48,9% 27,7% 23,4% 2,60 1,14 
in an English speaking country 
22. Students want teachers to speak more 64,4% 24,4% 11,1% 2,33 1,00 
English in class 
23. Students like textbooks in English 73,9% 21,7% 4,3% 2,11 0,77 
Table 38: Attitudes toward education in English on the part of parents of students in secondary 
education  
 Question Agree Neutral Disagree Mean SD 
10. I think Statian schools should teach students 84,6% 7,7% 7,7% 1,89 0,97 
to read and write in English 
15. I would encourage students to study abroad 27,5% 45,0% 27,5% 2,95 0,90 
in an English speaking country 
23. Students want teachers to speak more 66,7% 17,9% 15,4% 2,27 1,02 
English in class 
24. Students like textbooks in English 75,0% 20,0% 5,0% 2,11 0,80 
Table 39: Attitudes toward education in English on the part of teachers 
  
58 | P a g e 
 

 
 Question Agree Neutral Disagree Mean SD 
26. Students want teachers to speak English and 72,5% 20,0% 7,5% 2,13 0,84 
Dutch in class 
Table 45: Attitudes toward bilingualism on the part of teachers 
 
 Question Agree Neutral Disagree Mean SD 
25. Students want teachers to speak English and 83,9% 12,9% 3,2% 1,84 0,78 
Dutch in class 
Table 46: Attitudes toward bilingualism on the part of members of the general public 
3.4.7 Attitudes toward St. Eustatian language and identity 
In order to complete the investigation of language and identity among the population of St. Eustatius, 
the survey also contained statements concerning the local language, community and identity. 
As Table 47-52 indicate, the vast majority of the participants in all categories, except for the teachers, 
have strong feelings about their identity as Statians. They appreciate and share this identity with others 
in the community. These results are remarkable in view of the fact that a majority of the participants 
were not born on the island. Apparently, birthplace is not a decisive factor in the formation of a strong 
island based identity and sense of community. Even among teachers, of whom at least 70% were born 
outside the island (45% in Holland) the percentage of identification with other Statians (59%) is rather 
high. There is less consensus across the different groups of informants with regard to the importance of 
Statian English, but the average scores show that opinions are rather neutral in this respect. 
A majority in all categories thinks that the textbooks used at school are not connected to everyday life in 
Statia. The highest percentages of participants who think that this connection is missing are found 
among students in secondary education, their parents and the teachers. The statement that the school 
system prepares students for a future life in Statia was only included in the questionnaires for the adult 
groups of participants and tables 49-52 show that their opinions are quite neutral in this respect. 
  Yes Neutral No Mean SD 
1. I think of myself as a Statian 56,3 % 17,7 % 26,0 % 1,70 0,86 
3. I am happy to be Statian 69,5 % 17,9 % 12,6 % 1,43 0,71 
4. I feel close to other people from Statia 75,0 % 17,4 % 7,6 % 1,33 0,61 
11.  I think Statian English is important for the 65,6 % 16,7 % 17,7 % 1,52 0,78 
people in Statia 
20. The textbooks we use in school have little to 57,9 % 28,4 % 13,7 % 1,56 0,73 
do with our life in Statia 
Table 47: Attitudes toward Statian language and identity on the part of students in primary education 
(based on a three-point scale) 
  
60 | P a g e 
 

 
 Question Agree Neutral Disagree Mean SD 
1. I consider myself to be Statian 38,5% 20,5% 41,0% 3,03 1,46 
3.  I am happy to be Statian 50,0% 34,2% 15,8% 2,53 1,28 
5. I identify with other Statians 59,0% 23,1% 17,9% 2,39 1,08 
7. Statian schools prepare students for future 48,7% 23,1% 28,2% 2,73 1,02 
life in Statia 
13. We need to preserve Statian English 35,0% 37,5% 27,5% 2,87 1,07 
21. The textbooks used in school have little to 79,5% 7,7% 12,8% 1,92 1,02 
do with life in Statia 
Table 51: Attitudes toward Statian language and identity on the part of teachers 
 Question Agree Neutral Disagree Mean SD 
1. I consider myself to be Statian 76,7% 6,7% 16,7% 1,93 1,36 
3.  I am happy to be Statian 75,9% 10,3% 13,8% 1,90 1,18 
4. I identify with other Statians 65,5% 20,7% 13,8% 2,17 1,04 
6. Statian schools prepare students for future 53,1% 15,6% 31,3% 2,50 1,37 
life in Statia 
12. We need to preserve Statian English 44,8% 34,5% 20,7% 2,66 1,32 
20. The textbooks used in school have little to 67,9% 25,0% 7,1% 2,00 1,19 
do with life in Statia 
Table 52: Attitudes toward Statian language and identity on the part of members of the general public 
3.4.8 Evaluations of the students’ academic results  
The survey also included a statement designed to investigate the opinions of students, parents, teachers 
and other stakeholders with respect to the academic results obtained by the students.  
As shown in table 53, the opinions of the students are similar and rather neutral (the mean score of the 
primary students is based on a three-point scale).  
21. I am unhappy with my results in school      
  Yes Neutral No Mean SD 
 Students in primary education 35,1 % 25,5 % 39,4 % 2,04 0,87 
 Students in secondary education  32,3 %  36,5 % 31,3 % 3,00 1,22 
Table 53: Students’ opinions about their academic results 
Table 54 shows that the other categories of participants, in particular the parents, are more critical with 
respect to the results of the students in school. A majority agrees with the statement that thye are 
unhappy with the results of the students. Only in the case of the teachers is the percentage lower than 
50%.  
  
62 | P a g e 
 

All groups were compared on the following topics: ‘Attitudes toward Dutch language’, ‘Attitudes toward 
school English’, ‘Attitudes toward bilingualism’, ‘Attitudes toward education in English’ and ‘Attitudes 
toward education in Dutch’. Groups were compared on a 4-point scale based on ‘The importance of 
Dutch in carrying out certain activities’.  
To facilitate the comparison between the groups, the scale of measurement had to be equal. Therefore 
the original 5-point scale data for students in secondary education students was reduced to a 3-point 
scale to match the original 3-point scale of students in primary education. This was done for all topics, 
except for the topic measuring the importance of Dutch in carrying out certain activities, which is based 
on a 4-point scale for all groups. The assessment for each topic is based on a set of questions. The 
specific set of questions utilized to assess each topic are listed in Table 55. 
The scores of question 12 were reversed in order to measure a positive attitude toward the Dutch 
language (with a score of 1) and a negative attitude (with a score of 5), in order to match the other 
questions related to this topic. In order to reduce the various questions pertaining to each topic into one 
variable, the overall mean was calculated for the set of questions. A one-way ANOVA was conducted to 
compare the participant groups under consideration, as well as a Bonferroni post-hoc test. The internal 
consistency of the set of questions was calculated with Cronbach’s alfa and listed in Table 55. A 
Cronbach’s alfa (α) of .500 or higher was expected. If this expectation was not borne out, the topic was 
excluded from the statistical analysis, as was the case for ‘Attitudes toward school English’. 
  
64 | P a g e 
 

concerning their attitudes toward education in English (p = 0.057). Both groups show a rather positive 
attitude on this topic.  
Fourth, the topic ‘Attitudes toward education in Dutch’ was analysed. A statistically significant 
difference was found between the students in primary education and students in secondary education 
regarding their attitudes toward education in Dutch (F(1, 193)=4.222, p = 0.041). The students in 
primary education are more positive toward education in Dutch than the students in secondary 
education.  
Finally, the topic ‘Importance of Dutch in carrying out certain activities’ was analysed. A statistically 
significant difference was found between the students in primary education and students in secondary 
education on how important they find the Dutch language in carrying out certain activities (F(1, 
193)=25.844, p = 0.000). Students in secondary education find Dutch more important than students in 
primary education.  
 
 Students in primary Students in secondary 
education (n=97) education (n=98) 
mean SD Mean SD 
Attitudes toward the Dutch language 1,39 0,52 1,63 0,58 
Attitudes toward bilingualism 1,32 0,56 1,33 0,51 
Attitudes toward education in English 1,60 0,54 1,46 0,44 
Attitudes toward education in Dutch 1,69 0,58 1,86 0,59 
Importance of Dutch* 1,30 0,45 1,05 0,14 
Table 56: Mean and standard deviation, on a three-point scale (lower mean = more positive, higher 
mean = less positive) for the students in primary and secondary education (*the data for the topic 
‘importance of Dutch’ is on a 4-point scale (lower mean = more important, higher mean = less 
important). 
4.2.3 Comparative analysis between secondary school students in Schakelklas, first year, and 
combined second & third years 
First, the topic ‘Attitudes toward the Dutch language’ was analysed. Among students in secondary 
education a statistically significant difference was found between the Schakelklas, first year and 
combined group of second & third year students (F(2, 95)=5.777, p = 0.004). A Bonferroni post-hoc test 
revealed that the combined group of second & third year students has a significantly more negative 
attitude toward the Dutch language than the group Schakelklas (p =0.014 ) and the group of first year 
students (p = 0.011). The means and standard deviations for each group on each topic are listed in Table 
57.  
Second, the topic ‘Attitudes toward bilingualism’ was analysed. A statistically significant difference was 
found between the Schakelklas, first year and combined group of second & third year students (F(2, 
95)= 3.632, p = 0.030). A Bonferroni post-hoc test revealed though, that no statistical significant pairwise 
66 | P a g e 
 

The scores on question 13 were reversed in order to measure a positive attitude toward the Dutch 
language (with a score 1) and a negative attitude (with a score 5), in order to match the other questions 
related to this topic. In order to reduce the various questions pertaining to a single topic into one 
variable, the overall mean was calculated for the set of questions. A one-way ANOVA was conducted to 
compare the participant groups under consideration. 
The internal consistency of the set of questions was calculated with Cronbach’s alfa and is included in 
Table 58. A Cronbach’s alfa (α) of .500 or higher was expected. If this expectation was not borne out, the 
topic was excluded from the statistical analysis, as was the case for ‘Attitudes toward school English’. 
 
Attitudes toward the Dutch language α = .554 
11. I like hearing Dutch spoken  
13. It is a waste of time to learn Dutch (reversed)  
17. I would like to improve my skills in Dutch  
Attitudes toward school English α = .216 
7. I like speaking standard/school English  
16. I would like to improve my skills in English  
Attitudes toward education in English  α = .705 
9. I think Statian schools should teach students to read and write in English  
14. I would encourage students to study abroad in an English speaking country  
22. Students want teachers to speak more English in class  
23. Students like textbooks in English  
Attitudes toward education in Dutch  α = .683 
10. I think Statian schools should teach students to read and write in Dutch  
15. I would encourage students to study abroad in a Dutch speaking country  
18. When teachers speak Dutch in class students feel free to express themselves  
24. Students like textbooks in Dutch  
Importance of Dutch in carrying out certain activities α = .751 
27. Earning money & getting a job  
28. Reading & writing  
35. Passing tests  
Table 58: The set of questions for each topic, together with the Cronbach’s α value for each set 
4.3.2 Comparative analysis between parents and members of the general public 
First, the topic ‘Attitudes toward the Dutch language’ was analysed. No statistically significant difference 
was found between the groups of parents of students in primary education, parents of students in 
secondary education and members of the general public on their attitudes toward the Dutch language 
(p = 0.161). Overall there is a neutral attitude toward the Dutch language. The means and standard 
deviation for each topic for each group are given in Table 59.  
68 | P a g e 
 

Language use  
Statian English is widely used by all groups except for the teachers, not only in informal situations such 
as with family and friends, but also with colleagues. In conversations with strangers, Statian English is 
frequently replaced by school/standard English by adults. The use of Dutch is rather limited across all 
categories of participants, except for the teachers. We only find high percentages for the use of Dutch in 
the case of students communicating with their teachers, although teachers indicate that they use 
standard/school English more frequently to communicate with students and colleagues outside of 
school.  
The importance of Dutch in different domains  
The results indicate a strong consensus with respect to the importance of Dutch for the population of St. 
Eustatius. All categories agree that Dutch is only important for instrumental purposes, related to 
education and the job market, as indicated by the high percentages for the following activities: (i) 
passing tests, (ii) earning money & getting a job, (iii) reading & writing and (iv) raising children. The 
percentages for the importance of Dutch are slightly higher in the categories of students and slightly 
lower in the categories of parents of students in secondary education and teachers. Dutch is less or not 
important for integrative functions related to social activities within the community, such as making 
friends, being liked and talking on the phone. 
Attitudes toward language and education  
Most of the participants do not feel strong ties with the Netherlands, but in general they have a positive 
attitude toward Dutch in the sense that they like hearing the language, want to improve their skills in 
Dutch and strongly disagree with the statement that learning Dutch is a waste of time. Only students in 
secondary education and their parents have a less positive attitude toward Dutch. 
A vast majority thinks that the school system should help the students develop reading and writing skills 
in Dutch, but the results suggest that the students are not optimally prepared to achieve this goal. In 
general students do not like their Dutch textbooks and parents have trouble helping their children with 
homework in Dutch. Attitudes are particularly more negative among students in secondary education 
and their parents, as students feel less free to express themselves in Dutch and they are not very 
motivated to study abroad in a Dutch speaking country.  
Attitudes toward standard/school English are positive, as are attitudes toward education in English, 
especially among students in secondary education and their parents, who also favour future studies in 
an English rather than in a Dutch speaking country. In fact most of the participants are advocates of an 
education system that leads to a high competence in both English and Dutch, which is not surprising in 
view of the worldwide importance of English and the importance attributed to Dutch for education and 
the job market indicated by the results of this survey. The overall positive attitudes toward bilingualism 
further corroborate this hypothesis. 
In general attitudes toward Statian language identity are positive and the participants show a strong 
sense of community, in spite of the fact that many of them were born outside the island. A majority in 
70 | P a g e 
 

Students in secondary education as well as their parents share less positive attitudes toward Dutch and 
education in Dutch than those found among other groups. A statistical analysis confirms that attitudes 
are particularly more negative among students who did not attend the Schakelklas and, hence, had less 
preparation before they were immersed/submerged in a secondary education system whose goal is the 
exclusive use of a language of instruction which is a foreign language for the majority of the population.  
72 | P a g e 
 

 
Figure 1. The storyboard used to elicit stories from the students in English and in Dutch 
The decision of the research team to use this test in the context of our work on St. Eustatius is based on 
the fact that it would provide us with data which would allow us to assess and map the development of 
language proficiency in both English and Dutch throughout the transitional period, which corresponds 
roughly to between the ages of 10 and 15. In this way we would be able to describe the competencies of 
St. Eustatian pupils in writing and in expressing themselves using the consecutive languages of 
instruction of the St. Eustatian public education system before, during and after the transitional period 
from English to Dutch as language of instruction. 
The test was administered to: 1) all pupils in all groep 7 and groep 8 classes (all Grade 5 and 6 classes) of 
all 4 primary schools; 2) all students in all of the three Schakelklas sections (A, B and C) at the secondary 
school; and 3) first, second and third year students at the secondary school. In total, 177 tests were 
administered, 94 at the 4 primary schools, including 46 groep 7 students and 48 groep students; and 83 
at the Gwendoline van Putten secondary school, including 30 in the three Schakelklas sections, and 53 in 
the first, second and third years of secondary education (see Appendix 3.2). From this corpus of 177 
texts, 52 samples have been selected for discussion here, because they are representative of the 
diversity of language proficiency among all groups (see Appendix 3.3).  
  
74 | P a g e 
 

students were told that they would be writing their own stories. At first, most were quite enthusiastic 
about writing stories, but as soon as they were told that they would be writing not only in English but 
also in Dutch, the enthusiasm of the students dwindled. The students generally wrote better stories in 
English than in Dutch. The students who were asked to write in Dutch before writing in English generally 
took a much longer time to start the task than those asked to write in English first. Some students flatly 
refused to write the story in Dutch. 
As a point of reference for assessment of the proficiency test, the team opted to use the core objectives 
for Dutch in Primary Education in the Netherlands (2006) and applied these core objectives to the 
samples to check whether one or both of the stories written by each participant would match the level 
of language proficiency expected at the end of primary education in the Netherlands. The core 
objectives for Dutch in Primary Education in the Netherlands include the abilities to copy, to describe, to 
structure and to assess. Students who complete primary education in the Netherlands are supposed to 
know the rules for the spelling of verbs and other words, and proper punctuation. For students who 
have had English as their language of instruction in primary education to comply with these core 
objectives, one would expect an English rendering of the story of equivalent quality to the following 
fragment from a 10 year old girl in groep 7 at the SDA primary school (fragment ED15 – English: see 
Appendix 3.3 for full examples of stories written by the students): 
One day a woman was walking down the road with her purse. Then out of the  
blue a thief came and stole the woman’s purse. He ran down the road 
away from the woman. But when he was running he ran past a policeman on 
duty. The police man saw him and started to chase the thief. Finally the policeman 
caught the robber he arrested him and made him give back the purse to 
the woman. She thanked the policeman and slapped the thief and everyone but 
the thief live happy ever after. The thief spent 15 years in prison. 
Unfortunately, such high quality stories were very rare among those written by primary and even 
secondary school students. The stories written by primary school students in groep 7 and groep 8 are 
generally of poor quality and do not meet the standards set out in the core objectives for primary 
education. Even compared to many of the stories written by 15 and 16 year old secondary school 
students, this young girl’s performance on the narrative test is exceptionally high. In general, teachers in 
both primary and secondary schools are acutely aware that there is a gap between the quality of 
performance of students when they complete their primary education and the quality of performance 
expected of them when they enter secondary school.  
5. Findings 
In general, the students were able to produce descriptions of the six drawings in the story board. Most 
stories however lack detail and stick to a simple description of the main story line in simple sentences. 
Some students from groep 7, groep 8 and Schakelklas created stories that showed broader narrative 
skills by giving the characters names (samples ED20 and DE7 in Appendix 3.3), by using adjectives to 
describe character and mood (samples DE14 and DE27 in Appendix 3.3) and by using linking words. 
Some even invented additional details like the date of the crime (sample DE7), the motive for the crime 
76 | P a g e 
 

and run after him until he catch the thief and  
return the bag to the lady 
Spelling  
In most cases the samples included many spelling mistakes, and no samples were found that had no 
spelling mistakes in both languages. Even very frequent words like politie (samples ED11, ED20 and DE31 
in Appendix 3.3), vrouw (sample DE11 in Appendix 3.3) or juf (sample ED7 in Appendix 3.3) are an 
obstacle for some of the participants. Sometimes spelling of certain words varies within one text as in 
the spelling of lady in sample DE6. 
The Effect of Schakelklas 
The writing proficiency in Dutch of the HAVO1 secondary school students shows improvement when 
compared to that of groep 7 and groep 8 in primary school, and their written language proficiency in 
Dutch is getting closer to their writing proficiency in English. This does not mean that the language skills 
of all participants are sufficient. A 13 year old boy in HAVO 1, who reports that he speaks English at 
home, wrote the following two short stories (sample ED16) in English and Dutch: 
 
“a boy (tief) thiefs a lady handbag and runs away with it 
and de police chases de man and after the police catches 
de man and de lady was happy” 
“Een jongen boof een vrouw handtas en weg gerend met het 
en de politie heeft achter de man gerennen en de politie heeft  
de man gepakt en de vrouw was verliefd” 
Both versions contain a number of features that can also be seen in the writing of groep 7 and groep 8 
students in primary school: many spelling mistakes, no or limited use of punctuation, vocabulary issues 
and grammatical issues in word order and in verb forms, mixed use of articles, etc. In this example more 
issues can be found in the Dutch version than in the English version, and this is true for most of the 
HAVO1 students (as in e.g. DE28, DE29 and DE30 in Appendix 3.3). This group of HAVO-students have 
gone through an extra year of Schakelklas before they started with their HAVO-education, but their 
language proficiency in both English and Dutch is still far below the levels expected upon completion of 
primary education. The language skills of the students in the first year of vocational education are 
worse: samples DE3, DE7 and ED8 in Appendix 3.3 are some extreme examples. 
In all groups that took the test, there were students who showed serious deficiencies in writing skills, 
sometimes in both Dutch and English, at other times in one of the languages more than in the other. 
There is a high probability that these students will leave the school system without being able to 
perform simple language tasks in one of or both languages. Examples of these cases are samples ED13, 
ED14, De13, DE16, DE26, DE29, DE30, ED4, ED5, DE11, ED7 and ED8 in Appendix 3.3. 
6. Conclusions 
The goal of the narrative proficiency test was to find out (1) What happens to the language proficiency 
in English during the transitional phase? and (2) To what extent does proficiency in Dutch after the 
78 | P a g e 
 

4. Classroom observations and stakeholder interviews: Reports on 
the First and Second Visits 
 
This section contains the overview of interviews and discussions the research team held, the reports on 
the classroom observations, and further actions of the research team. For privacy reasons the contents 
of the interviews and discussions can not be published per stakeholder or stakeholder group, but have 
been brought together in an anonymous overview at the end of this chapter. 
1. Stakeholder interviews: First visit 
Narrative Report St. Eustatius Language and Education Research Team 
Preparatory Visit to St. Eustatius 21 February – 2 March 2013 
The Preparatory Visit of the St. Eustatius Language and Education Research Team took place from 21 
February to 2 March 2013. The visit was planned to lay the groundwork for the team’s Survey Visit, 
which will take place from 12 to 27 April 2013. To prepare for the Survey Visit, the Team intended to 
achieve the following objectives: 
1) Brief all of the relevant stakeholders on the nature and purpose of the proposed research. 
2) Answer any questions and clarify any doubts that stakeholders might have concerning the 
proposed research. 
3) Allow stakeholders to provide input into the research process at all levels from the procedures 
to be followed to the actual research questions that will be answered by the study. 
4) Reconfirm the willingness of stakeholders to participate in the proposed research. 
5) Gain a preliminary, global, and qualitative understanding of how the stakeholders view the 
present situation on the island in terms of language and education. 
6) Allow the Research Team members themselves to establish a working relationship and to share 
their past research work and experience in the field of language and education.  
7) Provide the Research Team with the opportunity to elaborate a working plan for the entire 
research project in general and for the Survey Visit in particular. 
 
As can be seen from the contents of this document, we are happy to report that all of these objectives 
were more than met by the activities which we were able to carry out during the Preparatory Visit. We 
owe the success of the visit in large part to the enthusiasm of all of the stakeholders and to their sincere 
commitment to ensuring that the children and youth of St. Eustatius have the best opportunities to 
reach their full potential in the educational process.  
THURSDAY 21 February:  
Travel and arrival: N. Faraclas 
FRIDAY 22 February: 
10h00-11h00: Television Interview: Announcement of the Research Team visit 
80 | P a g e 
 

It was confirmed that Netherlands government scholarships are now available for both academic and 
technical scholarships for study at any approved regional institution. Sending students to Caribbean 
universities first before sending them to universities farther afield might lessen culture shock, and allow 
students to stay in closer touch with their families and with Statia. Some students are reluctant to leave 
their parents.  
The special needs of students who are not Dutch citizens are being somewhat overlooked. There is a 
lack of scholarships for these students, even though these are among those most willing to stay on 
Statia and contribute. There is a lack of parental involvement due to the language barrier. Some have 
suggested after school classes for parents. 
According to official policy, the present system uses English as language of instruction and language of 
initial literacy in Grades 1-4, a transition to Dutch from Grade 5, and Dutch as language of instruction in 
secondary school, with explanation allowed in English, except in schakelklas. 
SDA primary school: It is difficult to find SDA Dutch teachers, so the transition to Dutch doesn’t happen 
until later than in other schools. Results have been better in this school, because English is used longer 
as language of instruction, there are smaller classes, and there is higher repetition rate. Extra Dutch 
classes are given in the afternoon at that school. 
Statia Terminal School for children of terminal employees: They use US curriculum/exams and English 
only. They are currently seeking recognition from the Netherlands. If they want recognition and funds 
from Netherlands, they will need to honor any request of any Dutch citizen to have education provided 
in Dutch. 
Formerly, there were two tests per year, one of these was local, more contextualized. CITO toets is now 
given in English for most of primary and some of secondary school. By 2013 all tests should be same for 
the European and Caribbean Netherlands. By 2016, the Caribbean Netherlands should have the same 
levels as the European Netherlands. More Dutch teachers have been brought in to Statia since 10/10/10 
to raise levels of Dutch, but many of these have had problems adjusting. In Saba, CITO toets are all given 
in English and the final secondary exam is CXCE. 
Bridging and transition need more management. Teachers complain that they have insufficient support 
to manage transitions. There are some lateral linkages that help, such as informal peer links, the 
Language Group, the principals’ groups (monthly meetings, bi-monthly meeting of principals and 
political partners, etc.). Principals are overworked so they don’t have enough time to give the teachers 
all of the support that they need. 
Some feel that in the same secondary school, there should be 2 tracks, one to prepare students to take 
the Netherlands National Secondary Exam in Dutch, and another to prepare students to take the 
Netherlands National Secondary Exam in English.  
Arrival (after unexpected delays due to aircraft problems): E Mijts 
TUESDAY 26 February: 
82 | P a g e 
 

The stakeholders were briefed on the proposed research, their questions answered, their doubts 
clarified, and their inputs invited. The stakeholders expressed willingness to participate in the research.  
WEDNESDAY 26 February: 
9h00-10h00: Meeting with Commissioner 
Location: Commissioner’s Office 
The Commissioner was briefed about the progress being made on the Research Project. His response 
was positive and supportive. He was asked about language use in government.  
10h30-11h30: Meeting with EduCenter and Youth Opportunities Program 
3 stakeholders consulted 
Location EduCenter Office 
The stakeholders were briefed on the proposed research, their questions answered, their doubts 
clarified, and their inputs invited. The stakeholders expressed willingness to participate in the research.  
13h00-14h00 Mega D Youth Foundation 
2 stakeholders consulted 
Location: Mega D Youth Foundation Office 
The stakeholders were briefed on the proposed research, their questions answered, their doubts 
clarified, and their inputs invited. The stakeholders expressed willingness to participate in the research.  
16h00-19h30: Educational Center for Excellence 
4 stakeholders consulted 
Location: ECE 
The stakeholders were briefed on the proposed research, their questions answered, their doubts 
clarified, and their inputs invited. The stakeholders expressed willingness to participate in the research.  
THURSDAY 28 February: 
Departure: E Mijts 
8h30-9h30 Center for Youth and Family 
2 stakeholders consulted 
Location: RCN 
84 | P a g e 
 

Location: Governor’s Office 
The Governor of St. Eustatius was briefed on details of the project and given a Progress Report of 
Preliminary Visit. He was very supportive of the study. 
FRIDAY 1 March 2013 
8h00-11h00: Planning for Survey Visit and Other Research Activities 
Departure: EP Kester 
12h00-13h00: Meeting with Head Dutch Teacher of the Secondary School 
1 stakeholder consulted 
Location: RCN 
14h00-15h00: Meeting with Ms. Olive Berkel, Culture Bearer 
1 stakeholder consulted 
Location: Public Library 
15h00-20h00: Drawing up Final Report and Work Plan 
SATURDAY 2 March 
Departure: N Faraclas 
 
 
  
86 | P a g e 
 

The European Netherlander teacher tried to teach the class in Dutch as much as possible, but was 
obliged to use English often. A Core-Periphery effect was evident: A small core group of students 
actively participated in Dutch and sat together close to the teacher. The others were sitting farther away 
from the teacher, not participating, and needing special instructions in English. Some were silent and 
acting shy and others were acting out. Students resented the strict approach of the teacher. Some 
students were asking for attention and they were not getting it. 
The main part of the lesson was a dictation, with the students writing out vocabulary words that they 
had studied in Dutch. Most students could not interact in Dutch, but a few could do so very well. 
Students spoke Statian English with each other and tried to explain things in Statian English to each 
other, but the teacher would not let them do so, because it was a test. Most students seemed to know 
the basics of Dutch spelling. 
Primary School Class Observation 2 (Social Studies lesson in English): 
The European Netherlander teacher and the Afro-Caribbean assistant teacher gave the class almost 
entirely in English. There were separate materials in English and Dutch. The Social Studies test that the 
students took during this session was in English for the majority English dominant students and Dutch 
for the few Dutch dominant students.  
Best Practice: Formerly, there were no contextualized materials for Social and Natural Science, but the 
teacher has created Statian-contextualized materials in both languages for these subjects (only a few 
use the Dutch materials). The Dutch dominant students are all from European Netherlands. One of the 
few Dutch dominant children gets some materials in Dutch others in English, since she/he has been in 
Statia for 5 years and she/he now feels more comfortable in English than in Dutch. One of the students 
uses Spanish and English.  
The students almost invariably asked and answered questions in English and the teacher almost 
invariably asked and answered questions in English. Students were very engaged and working with 
materials/tests. Students were not shy at all and all were talking. They used Statian English with each 
other. Even those students who were acting out and not attending to the story writing session in Dutch 
were engaged and working quickly on their tests. Students were asking questions, and the teacher was 
trying to answer in English.  
The few European Netherlander students and one of the Latin American student finished their tests 
first. As they finished, the students went on to do an art/biology lesson drawing pictures. The non-
European students sometimes had a difficult time interacting with the teacher. They were often looking 
for praise and attention but not getting it. Sometimes they resented the teacher being short with them. 
Some Latin American identified students seemed to be doing extremely well, but a few were among the 
slowest in the class.  
Best Practice: The teacher uses a Statian accent when speaking English. He/she also speaks Spanish and 
interacts in Spanish with Latin American students. Students also interact with the teacher in Statian 
English. 
88 | P a g e 
 

From the moment when the students realized that writing in Dutch was involved, the enthusiasm of the 
students dwindled. The students generally wrote better stories in English than in Dutch. The students 
who were asked to write in Dutch before writing in English generally took a much longer time to start 
the task than those asked to write in English first. 
Observations: 
Primary School Class Observation 3 (English lesson in English):  
The students participated actively in the English lesson. They were getting lots of positive feedback from 
the Guyanese teacher. The teacher was asking lots of questions and all of the students were answering. 
The teacher was interpreting and what the students wanted to say, rephrasing it when necessary. The 
teacher used lots of smiles. 
The teacher began to list all of the points being made by the students about what successful 
communication is. There was not even enough space on the blackboard for all of the excellent points 
being made by the students. There was no core-periphery effect in this classroom. The students were 
performing on a very high level. All of the students were eager and raising their hands. There were no 
students acting out. The teacher gave the students lots of feedback. The teacher was strict, but the 
students didn’t resent it.  
Primary School Class Observation 4 (Science lesson in English):  
The students actively participated in this lesson. The Surinamese teacher was using English very 
effectively. There was no core/periphery effect in the classroom. The children were performing at a very 
high level. The students were very eager to raise their hands and participate. The students felt very free 
to express themselves.  
The teacher was less strict than others, and the children really responded. The teacher allowed the 
students to interrupt her/him and she/he rephrased the students’ answers. She/he got the students 
engaged with their materials, by using real examples from Statia. The teacher sometimes used Statian 
English and the students felt extremely free. The teacher used what the children said to make 
connections to the next points in the lesson. The teacher made abstract concepts clear and relevant to 
the students. Students told stories from their own experience. The teacher asked comprehension 
questions about the reading, using cloze sentences.  
Primary School Class Observation 5 (Dutch reading lesson):  
The teacher spoke in English, asking the students to read silently in Dutch. The students were uneasy 
and not really engaged. None of them seemed to be reading the material.  
Primary School Class Observation 6 (Mathamatics lesson in English):  
The teacher had students playing catch doing multiplication tables. All of the students were required to 
be involved because the teacher called on all of them in English while throwing the ball to them. The 
90 | P a g e 
 

out with all of the 150 children in the school today. The Acting Principal would like more training in 
Dutch, as do many other English speaking teachers. 
Survey (Group 7, 15 students): 
The survey session was generally successful and the students did not find it difficult. 
Narrative Assessment (Group 7, 15 students):  
From the moment when the students realized that writing in Dutch was involved, the enthusiasm of the 
students dwindled. The students generally wrote better stories in English than in Dutch. The students 
who were asked to write in Dutch before writing in English generally took a much longer time to start 
the task than those asked to write in English first. 
Survey (Group 8, 21 students): 
The survey session was generally successful and the students did not find it difficult. 5 students came 
late, because they were attending remedial Dutch reading classes for the CITO toets. 
Narrative Assessment (Group 8, 21 students):  
From the moment when the students realized that writing in Dutch was involved, the enthusiasm of the 
students dwindled. The students generally wrote better stories in English than in Dutch. The students 
who were asked to write in Dutch before writing in English generally took a much longer time to start 
the task than those asked to write in English first. 
Observations: 
Primary School Class Observation 8 (English lesson in English): 
This was a relatively large class. The chairs needed to be lined up strictly into rows for a test. During the 
review in English, students answered questions with enthusiasm, and were eager to raise hands. The 
students were not afraid to make mistakes. There was no core periphery effect.  
Students had a fair knowledge of the material. Students read out the directions. Their reading levels and 
comprehension were good. The Guyanese teacher gave individual help to students, and they responded 
well to her/him. She/he had the right facial expressions and body language to make the students feel 
comfortable. She/he was not afraid to touch them and they were not afraid to touch her/him. There 
were no signs of students not having their affective needs satisfied.  
Most students were working hard on their tests. Some had a hard time settling down, but eventually 
everyone attended to the test. In general, the students were able to answer many questions on the test, 
even the ones who initially found it hard to sit still. The teacher gave books to the students who finished 
before the others to read silently. Some who finished quickly were also given other class work to do 
silently. Most students were able to sit quietly and read. After the test, the teacher asked the students 
about the reading assignment.  
92 | P a g e 
 

Scheduling was finalized with the secondary school Principal for the survey, the narrative assessment, 
the interviews and the observations at the school. Arrangements were also made for the parents’ 
meeting on Monday night. 
Thursday 18 April 2013: 
9h45 - 15h00: Golden Rock School 
Meeting with Golden Rock Principal (Wednesday 12h00): Scheduling was finalized with the Golden 
Rock Principal for the survey, the narrative assessment, the interviews and the observations at the 
school. The Golden Rock (Catholic) school takes children from any spiritual/religious background.  
Survey (Group 7, 9 students): 
The survey session was generally successful and the students did not find it difficult. 
Narrative Assessment (Group 7, 9 students):  
From the moment when the students realized that writing in Dutch was involved, the enthusiasm of the 
students dwindled. The students generally wrote better stories in English than in Dutch. The students 
who were asked to write in Dutch before writing in English generally took a much longer time to start 
the task than those asked to write in English first. 
Survey (Group 8, 8 students): 
The survey session was generally successful and the students did not find it difficult. 
Narrative Assessment (Group 8, 8 students):  
From the moment when the students realized that writing in Dutch was involved, the enthusiasm of the 
students dwindled. The students generally wrote better stories in English than in Dutch. The students 
who were asked to write in Dutch before writing in English generally took a much longer time to start 
the task than those asked to write in English first. 
Observations: 
Primary School Class Observation 11 (Science Lesson in Dutch and English):  
The Curaçaoan teacher used a mixture of Dutch and English, with fluent code switching. Students were 
eager to participate. Some answered in English and others answered in Dutch. The teacher asked the 
students to read a book during the lesson, but instead they started filling out the workbook game pages 
that she/he had given them for homework. She/he said that they love to do the fun things, but that 
most were not ready to do the academic things in Dutch. 
Primary School Class Observation 12 (English Grammar Lesson in English):  
94 | P a g e 
 

18h30 – 21h00: Meeting with the Secondary School Board (GvP school) (3 Members present):  
Friday 19 April 2013: 
8h30 - 10h00: Survey and Focus Group Interview with Youth and Family (Youth and Family Office) 
(Director) The Research Team introduced themselves and the project. The Youth and Family Office 
Director has been working at the center for about one and a half years.  
10h30 – 12h00: Survey and Interview with the Secondary School Head Teacher for Dutch and with the 
Department Leader of VBO (GvP School) 
14h00 – 16h30: Survey and Focus Group Interview with the Language Group (Library) (5 Members 
present, including the School Coach) The basic task of this group is to create a learning line for Dutch 
language teaching in primary education in order to transition form the current program to the NVTiC 
(SPLIKA) program.  
Saturday 20 April 2013: 
9h00 – 17h00: Data Processing 
Sunday 21 April 2013: 
9h00 – 13h30: Data Processing 
13h45 - 16h30: Radio Interview at CTC Radio Station with Former Commissioner Schmidt, announcing 
the meeting for parents on Monday and venues and times for filling out questionnaires. 
Monday 22 April 2013: 
9h00 - 16h30: Gwendoline van Putten School 
Survey (Schakelklas A, B, and C; VMBO-B-2; HAVO-1; First Year; VMBO-K&T-1; VMBO-T-3ac; HAVO-3): 
The survey sessions were generally successful and the students did not find them difficult. Some needed 
to have the questions read to them. 
Narrative Assessment (Schakelklas A, B, and C; VMBO-B-2; HAVO-1; First Year; VMBO-K&T-1; VMBO-
T-3ac): 
From the moment when the students realized that writing in Dutch was involved, the enthusiasm of the 
students dwindled. The students generally wrote better stories in English than in Dutch. The students 
who were asked to write in Dutch before writing in English generally took a much longer time to start 
the task than those asked to write in English first. 
Observations: 
Secondary School Class Observation 14 (Schakelklas in Dutch): 
96 | P a g e 
 

students for examples, and usually only wrote her/his own rather complicated examples on the board, 
without checking whether the students understood.  
The teacher would not allow students to speak in English. When some students tried to make the 
connection between a vocabulary word such as het resultaat in Dutch and result in English, the teacher 
rejected the use of English. The 5 vocabulary words which were dealt with in the class were: het 
resultaat, het ideaal, de aanleiding, bedreigen, aanvaarden. There was one European descended girl in 
the class, who didn’t say a word. The teacher only used English to give the directions for the homework 
assignment. 
There was a dramatic Core-Periphery effect in the class. A few girls dominated the class, especially one 
who had just been to the Netherlands. None of the boys participated in any meaningful way. The 
teacher did not attempt to check to see if they had comprehended. 
Secondary School Class Observation 17 (Social Studies lesson in Dutch): 
The European Netherlander teacher used mainly Dutch, but did use English when important information 
was being communicated. The students used more English than Dutch. The students were practicing for 
a test. The students seemed to know the material. The teacher had a good, positive and playful 
approach, was not afraid to touch the students, was moving around the room to check to see that all the 
students were doing their work, and was attending to students with trouble understanding. 
Brief Interview with Students in this class: 
The students had mixed attitudes toward Dutch. Some were negative, one or two were positive, the rest 
were indifferent. Most had a favorable attitude toward English, but some were indifferent to both 
languages.  
Secondary School Class Observation 18 (Science lesson in Dutch): 
The teacher used Dutch to teach, but used some English as well. The students were responding. They 
were also acting out a bit, but the teacher handled it well. Among themselves, they spoke in English. The 
students responded to questions in English. The teacher spoke mainly Dutch, the students spoke mainly 
English. When the teacher gave instructions in Dutch, the students sometimes asked one another what 
the teacher meant. One student went immediately to work on his homework, while the others spent a 
lot of time getting started. Eventually, all of the students settled down and began to do the assignment.  
The teacher began to do the assignment with the students. The students were able to read the 
problems from the workbook out loud to the teacher. The students were engaged in the lesson and all 
worked together to solve the problem. The teacher took the students step-by-step through the 
problems. Not all of the students replied in Dutch. They had the correct answers, but they didn’t say 
them in Dutch. After the workbook lesson was finished, the students went on break.  
Brief Interview with Students in this class: 
98 | P a g e 
 

10h30 - 13h00: Survey and Focus Group Interview with Education Care Expertise Center (Director) (ECE 
Center)  
13h30 – 14h30: Debriefing RCN (RCN Office)  
The Research Team thanked the officers of the RCN Office for making their visit a great success and 
answered questions about the visit. 
14h30 - 15h30: Survey and Focus Group Interview with EduPartners/Youth Opportunity Center (4 
Officers) (EduPartners Center) 
16h00 - 16h30: Survey and Focus Group Interview with School Coach (Library)  
Results for the CITO toets: Three Minute Test (Dutch Reading) 
End of Year Test 2011-2102/Mid-Year Test 2012-2013  
 Statia: GdG Statia: BMS Statia SDA: 
E2011-2 /M2012-3 E2011-2 /M12-3 E11-2/M12-3 
Group 5 35.1 / 38.1 Missing / 38.7 20.2 / 34.6 
Group 6 20.4 / 27.1 missing / 27.6 47.5 / 50.1 
Group 7 31.9 / 48.1 missing / 53.3  51.8 / 57.4 
Group 8 39.8 / 54.5 missing / 44.2 51.2 / 61.2 
 
16h30 – 18h00: Meeting with the State Secretary for OCW, the Director of OCW for the Caribbean, the 
Governor, the Commissioner for Education, and other Officials (FD Roosevelt Airport) 
Thursday 25 April 2013: 
8h00 - 12h00: Individual Guidance for Stakeholders who Needed Assistance in Filling Out 
Questionnaires (RCN Office)  
8h30 - 9h30: Survey and Focus Group Interview with Probation Officer (Probation Office) 
Departure: Nicholas Faraclas. 
Friday 26 April 2013: 
Departure Day: Eric Mijts, and Ellen Petra Kester. 
  
100 | P a g e 
 

government and need no Dutch. ‘First we would like to decide where we would like to be. Then we will 
know how to get there.’  
 
 ‘Society has changed. Children are much more vocal than before. They don’t just accept 
things as adults say them. Many children say that they don’t like Dutch, ‘It’s not my language.’ Children 
have a negative attitude and a block toward Dutch. Some children refuse to respond to teachers in 
Dutch, even though their answers are correct. Teachers lack guidelines as to how to deal with students 
who know the material but not the language. Too many persons think that you can only get a higher 
education through Dutch.’ 
 
‘There is a special need in Statia because the local language is not school English. Some 
teachers don’t use standard English in school. What do we expect from the children? We as teachers 
need to look at our own competence in language (English and Dutch) before we look at the children’s 
competence.’ 
  
 ‘We face big challenges in Maths with problems which are also culturally inappropriate. 
Teachers try to make the materials culturally appropriate, but this is not always possible. With each level 
it gets harder. Assignments have to be translated word for word.’ 
 
 ‘We need a clear cut decision. We need a clear guideline about language in the schools. A 
main concern has always been language policy. The language policy for the elementary schools was to 
make English the language of instruction with Dutch as a strong second language. Teach English first, 
then teach the students as much Dutch as possible. This is a long term discussion that has been ongoing 
in Statia for decades. The implementation has not been what we expected. Saba has decided to have 
English only as their language of instruction. Statia needs the same strong decision making and 
implementation. There should be options made available for students to opt for one language of 
instruction or another. There needs to be a clear decision by the government. ‘We do not have to look 
to the [European] Netherlands for a decision!’ 
 
‘Various teachers from different places come to Statia. Teachers need to be vetted for 
proficiency in English. Many applicants from abroad may not be aware of the language situation in 
Statia.’ 
 
‘The CITO toets in English should be available for English speaking students, Dutch for Dutch 
speaking students. But some English students prefer to do the Maths toets in Dutch because they only 
know academic terms in Dutch. St. Martin parents can opt for either Dutch or English schools. In Statia, 
many students don’t get academic language in either English or Dutch.’ 
  
‘There is no support for teachers in terms of transition. Each teacher is on his/her own. Peer 
groups are useful, but there is no clear guidance and there are no tools. Readers for older learners at 
lower reading levels in Dutch are not interesting to them, they are too juvenile. ‘We do not know how to 
teach this curriculum.’ Language coaching is necessary. A language coach is needed for Statia. Someone 
pointed out that the appointment of a language coach at the secondary school has resulted in 
noticeable improvement, even after one single month. There is a need for Dutch second language 
materials appropriate to Statia.’ ‘I don’t know how to teach Dutch anymore’ ‘I feel like I’m on my own’ 
‘There are no answers, only questions.’ ‘Every teacher is on his own little island’ ‘I need more and 
different tools to teach Dutch.’ 
 
102 | P a g e 
 

‘We need to acknowledge the value of Statian English in the schools and in Statian society in 
general. I have been trying to do this for many years, but it has been an uphill battle. ‘Before 2000, 
teachers from English speaking countries were usually not allowed to come teach in Statia. The first such 
teachers came from St. Kitts and Guyana. They faced some discrimination. Presently, it seems like these 
English dominant teachers are being made to feel that they are less qualified than the Dutch dominant 
European Netherlander teachers who are coming into Statia in greater numbers now.’ 
 
‘There has been much controversy on the island regarding the language of instruction. I was 
involved in the 2007 efforts to put into place a language policy for Statia. Some want English as medium 
of instruction, some want Dutch. ‘People in decision making positions need to understand that there is 
no language better than another language.’ ‘The transition is not being made from Statian to Standard 
English in the schools, because the focus has always been on Dutch and the transition to Dutch.’ ‘There 
has always been a strong bias toward Dutch. The differences between Statian English and Standard 
English need to be studied by the students, both in terms of form as well as in terms of the contexts 
where each is used. Students need to understand and master their own language, learn to read and 
write it, and get an academic mastery of it before they go on to Dutch.’  
  
‘Language at the early childhood level must be fun. There was a teacher at our school who 
was very successful because she used spelend onderwijs. Immersion at this level is very important for 
students when they are learning Dutch as a foreign language. Students need exposure to a foreign 
language in order to learn it well. ‘  
 
‘If English were made the language of instruction and Dutch were being taught as a foreign 
language, then Dutch could be taught with immersion. Immersion is not a viable strategy for Dutch as a 
language of instruction in school. When we teach Dutch, we need to make it playful with immersion.’  
 
 ‘There is no formal orientation or training for European Netherlander teachers before we 
come to the island. When the School Boards do interviews in Holland or by teleconference or Skype, 
they give only a few bits of information about Statia to the interviewees.’ 
 
‘We have been swamped with training courses. When we came, we were told that Statia was 
doing Foundation Based Education (FBE). We had many, many training sessions in FBE, focused on 
English. In 2009, we were warned that we were no longer going to be using FBE and that the emphasis 
would probably move more toward Dutch. The English teachers were given some training in Dutch.’  
 
‘In Suriname, I was not interested in any language but Dutch. When I came to Statia, I learned 
English from the environment. Language courses are useless without using the language in the 
environment. It is extremely difficult to teach Statian students in Dutch. They need to have English as 
the language of instruction.’  
 
A Guyanese teacher would have liked to have learned Dutch in St. Eustatius, but she does not 
hear Dutch on the island. ‘I was told that Dutch is the mother tongue of Statia, but this is not true. When 
students know their mother tongue well, they can make the transition to another language better.’ 
‘English should be the language of instruction, with Dutch as a strong foreign language.’  
 
‘Those in the government need to know that we need to go from the known to the unknown. It 
is very hard for students to succeed in secondary school because of the language barrier. Those Spanish 
speaking students who have a strong foundation in their own language often do very well in Dutch.’  
104 | P a g e 
 

   Statian Teacher: ‘In school, Dutch was forced on us. I was OK with it, but many of my 
classmates fell behind.’ European Netherlander Teacher: ‘I agree. My students are really frustrated with 
Dutch. I’m trying to make the connections between English and Dutch. It is really important to make 
sure that students have a positive attitude toward Dutch. There is no consistent learning line for Dutch.’ 
 
 ‘Many who go to Holland have to come back, because they are not ready. Students need a full 
orientation.’ 
 
 ‘We have to pay attention as well to English. The transition from Statian English to Standard 
English needs attention. I got a terrible foundation in English, because we were taught in Dutch. But I 
never really learned Dutch here in Statia, I learned it later in the ABC Islands.’ 
 
 ‘We speak a language that is connected to English (Statian English) and we need to use 
English to give our students a firm foundation in English before we teach a foreign language’ 
 
‘Who is the biggest employer on the island? The children need to master the language that 
they need for employment. The main language of work on the island is English. So English should be the 
language of instruction. How many countries speak Dutch? The young people need to speak English for 
tourism. It is very important for students to master English first. Spelend onderwijs is key to teaching 
Dutch.  
 
3.1.4 Focus Group Sessions and Interviews with Teachers from Primary School ‘C’ 
 
‘Whatever language of instruction we use, the students need to understand what we are 
saying. Therefore, English is the logical language of instruction.’ 
 
‘I am using first language method that is used in Holland. This is very difficult, because 
sometimes I have to introduce a topic that the students haven’t even had in English yet. I want to go 
from the known to the unknown. I would like to use a foreign language method instead of a first 
language method. When I give a lesson, I have to translate everything into English. I am supposed to 
teach mathematics in Dutch, but I end up teaching it in English. The mathematics CITO toets is given in 
English.’  
 
‘Whatever method we use to teach Dutch it should be a foreign language method. It must be 
adapted to the Statian context.’ 
  
‘For vocabulary, I draw the words first, so they can get the concepts that they already know in 
English and translate them into Dutch. A new method will be available for Dutch by the next school year. 
There will be a conference in Aruba on this next month.’ Teachers: ‘There have been a lot of workshops 
and training opportunities for teachers since 10/10/10.’ 
 
 ‘I try to teach Statian history, but there are no textbooks. I have to make up my own materials 
from books that I find in the library, etc. There is no set program for any areas except language and 
mathematics.’  
 
‘Very little was provided in the way of orientation before my coming to Statia.’ ‘I was surprised 
by the lack of materials for Dutch and other subjects.’  
  
106 | P a g e 
 

 
‘There is absolutely no orientation for European Netherlands teachers coming to Statia. One 
of the teachers said that she/he came to Statia to be challenged and in fact, after 7 months, she/he has 
complied with all of her/his professional responsibilities (paperwork, testing, etc.) and she/he is bored. 
There seems to be a consistent pattern of placing European Netherlands teachers in the schools, 
because ‘Statians don’t have the necessary qualifications.’ ‘Dutch teachers tend to just find their own 
independent solutions when they find themselves in a difficult situation, so everyone ends up doing 
their own thing.’ 
 
3.2 Focus Group Sessions and Interviews with Secondary School Teachers 
 
All of the teachers in these focus group meetings and interviews agreed that the goal should be both 
English and Dutch proficiency. The great majority agreed that in St. Eustatius, the best way to get to 
academic proficiency in Dutch is to go via academic proficiency in English. There was general agreement 
on the fact that Dutch is a foreign language in Statia. ‘It is so strange for the children.’ When asked 
privately, the great majority of the GvP teachers, even those from the European Netherlands, think that 
English should be the language of instruction at both the primary and secondary levels. ‘The students 
are being taught in Chinese. Everything is being taught to tests that have nothing to do with the 
students’ reality.’ ‘The students should not be taught in Dutch, which is a foreign language for them. 
They should be taught in the language that they are more familiar with: English.’ They all agreed that 
there were no consistent learning lines and methods, and that everyone was improvising. One teacher 
summed it up: ‘We know one thing for sure, that the system that we have now is not good for the 
students.’ There was considerable confusion among the teachers concerning the policy and practice 
related to the transition from English to Dutch as the language of instruction, and about the agreements 
made about Dutch as language of instruction at GvP. Teachers do not know when they are allowed to 
speak English and when they are not allowed to do so. When all of the teachers were questioned about 
it, they say that they use English about 50% of the time.  
 
‘When we teach in Dutch at GvP, we are teaching to the walls.’ 
 
‘If you start off with Dutch a wall goes up right away. You have to start off in English and then 
throw in Dutch along the way. Students have not mastered Dutch enough to keep up. Even though I 
have a good background in Dutch myself, I don’t think that Dutch should be the language of instruction. 
The language should promote learning, not impede it. Dutch has become a major stumbling block to 
learning.’ 
 
‘Dutch is a foreign language in Statia, and Standard American English would be the optimal 
language of instruction throughout with Dutch as foreign language, with the goal of proficiency in Dutch 
to 2 years at secondary level in Holland. The highest level students (5 to 8 per year) should do their 
secondary school in the European Netherlands, or a special program should be created for them in 
Statia.’ 
 
 ‘I see so much creativity in Statian children when they arrive at school, but as the years go on, 
the lights begin to dim. By the time the students get to secondary school, for all but a few, the lights 
have gone out. In my opinion, most of my colleagues must share my optimism, otherwise, they wouldn’t 
be teaching. One big advantage to living on Statia is that any change we make in school can have a 
major impact on the entire society. But teachers have not been encouraged or rewarded for trying to go 
the extra mile. On the contrary, they are often punished and they stop.’ 
108 | P a g e 
 

‘Children who get a chance to learn first in their own language do better. Building a strong 
foundation in the students’ own language is important. It is hard to motivate students to read. 
Whatever language we choose as the language of instruction, we need to motivate the students. Why 
has the curriculum changed? Before, we had to read lots of books, now the students read so few. 
Reading should be fun, we have to be realistic. I don’t like to read. When the teacher forced me to read, 
I started to enjoy reading. I saw the benefit because I was forced to.  
 
‘We are setting the students up to fail. In elementary school, students enjoy Dutch. Everything 
starts at home. What role are the parents playing?  
 
‘Teachers need to be persistent in involving parents in their children’s education. Many after 
school programs are starting. Whatever solution we choose, we need to do it together. We need strong 
leadership, not everybody just doing their own thing. 
 
 ‘The children don’t have enough Dutch input to master Dutch. Primary schools are not 
preparing students sufficiently in Dutch. For example, a Group 6 teacher who is actually Dutch has 
decided to abandon using Dutch because the children don’t understand.’  
 
‘The Schakelklas has some effect, but as soon as the students leave, they go back to English.’  
 
‘All of the students will want to leave the island, and most will want to go to Holland, because 
it is less expensive for them. If you want to change this, you can’t do so in the school only, but it has to 
be a society wide change, a campaign. The highest officials in government make major mistakes in 
English, let alone Dutch. I have no objection to English becoming the language of instruction, but a 
transition will also need to be made from Statian English to Standard English. If a shift to English as 
language of instruction at secondary level happens, we will have very similar problems to those now 
encountered with Dutch.’  
 
‘You can’t solve the problem without a comprehensive master plan. If you start with small 
things, it won’t work. You must have an overall plan for the system.’ ‘You have to make zero-point 
departure. The transition from one language of instruction at primary to another language of instruction 
at secondary has proven to be a disaster and is totally unworkable. Whatever language you opt for in 
secondary, must also be the language of instruction at the primary level. If we still want Dutch as a 
language of instruction at the secondary level, Dutch should also be the language of instruction in 
primary as well. If we want English as the language of instruction, we would have to switch the roles of 
the two languages at the secondary level, with Dutch as a foreign language. It would be a positive 
development to get the Dutch to accept English as the language of instruction and Dutch as the foreign 
language, because this would show an acknowledgement and appreciation of the diversity within the 
Kingdom.’  
 
‘At VMBO level, it is unrealistic to use Dutch as the language of instruction. At HAVO and VMBO-
T levels, Dutch can and should be used as the language of instruction. Otherwise, English should be used 
as the language of instruction and Dutch should be taught as a foreign language. Students need to get a 
good foundation in English, with Dutch ‘walking alongside’ in a major way. For example, in secondary 
school the students should have English as language of instruction, with 4 hours of English and 3 hours 
of Dutch instruction per week until they reach class 3. Then at the beginning of class 3, they need to 
decide whether they want to opt for a Dutch Track, for those who want to go on to further studies in 
Dutch (probably with Dutch as language of instruction, and 6 hours of Dutch with 2 hours of English per 
110 | P a g e 
 

they leave primary school, so that they have only progressed one year during their entire secondary 
school career.’ 
 
 ‘Maybe the IQ of students in Statia is lower. This is because the smart ones leave.’ The Statian 
teachers said that this was untrue. Maybe one student left to study abroad because he/she had relatives 
to stay with, but this is not a general pattern. ‘Because students have opportunities based on their 
family connections, they have less motivation to succeed in school.’ ‘Some students are not interested in 
HAVO because it involves an extra year of schooling. Some are not even interested in getting a diploma. 
They want to start working as soon as possible.’ Others said that this had been true, but was changing. 
 
‘I use English as well as Dutch because it is their first language, but the books and test are in 
Dutch, so they need to get Dutch.’ ‘I try to insist that the students speak only Dutch in the classes, 
because they score low in Dutch and they need the practice. The students speak in English among 
themselves. VMBO-T students’ Dutch is sufficient so that they can handle the material. This group is 
advanced but they are only advanced because they have a grasp of Dutch. At the lower levels, students 
have a lot more problems because their Dutch is not adequate. I teach 10 different groups, of the 10 
groups, 5 have enough Dutch to grasp the material and 5 do not have enough Dutch. With the groups 
that don’t have sufficient Dutch ‘I compromise and use English. These groups don’t learn as much as 
they should, because I have to spend a lot of time with the language.’ 
 
‘The HAVO group do a little better than the VMBO students, but they often don’t know the 
meaning of even simple Dutch words. I have fears about how they will fare on the Dutch exams. I 
encourage reading a lot. Some parents see the importance of Dutch. The parents know that education 
should be in English, but they tend to see Holland as the only alternative for further study. Parents need 
to motivate their children to be serious about their studies. Students are happy with a mark of 5 or a 6, 
but this is not good enough. This cannot change with this generation. It will have to wait for the next 
generation. Some parents don’t even know what level their children have been placed at. In HAVO it is 
easy because it’s just one level, but VMBO is harder.’  
 
 ‘Before we had more links to other Dutch speaking islands (ABC), but now we are alone in the 
former Dutch Windward Islands in using Dutch. I feel that there is a negative ‘vibe’ going around about 
Dutch. We should not make a decision based on that feeling. I really see the negative attitude in the way 
the students speak about Dutch. The students relate better to African descended teachers and respect 
them more than they do the European descended teachers.’ 
  
 ‘The current Dutch only policy at GVP is not working. Only the students from Dutch speaking families 
get much Dutch before they come to school. But even many of those children usually answer their 
parents in English. When the children leave school, they don’t hear Dutch again until the next day at 
school. Most students will go on to further education off the island.’  
 
‘Dutch is a foreign language in Statia. English should be the language of instruction at both the 
primary and secondary levels.’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
112 | P a g e 
 

toward the US, and increasing numbers of Statian children are going to European Netherlands, where 
they have family who can house and protect them.’  
 
‘Saba uses English as the language of instruction and teaches Dutch as a foreign language. 
From observations in the primary schools on both islands, when students who speak Dutch as their first 
language are excluded, the results for speaking and understanding Dutch are much higher in Saba than 
in Statia. While there are negative attitudes toward Dutch on both islands, the attitudes are in general 
less negative on Saba than on Statia. The only CITO toets results for Dutch available are on reading 
speed. Unfortunately, this does not specifically test levels of comprehension in Dutch, which are 
generally higher in Saba than in Statia.’ 
 
 
 ‘Students whose parents speak Dutch at home don’t speak Dutch in school and don’t reply to 
their parents in Dutch. Many students in Statia hate Dutch because they feel that it’s been forced on 
them. They have a negative attitude toward Dutch. They are expected to perform at too high a level in 
Dutch and they fail. The children are suffering for all of this.’ 
 
 ‘Many students have negative attitudes toward Dutch. Even children from Dutch speaking 
homes don’t want to speak Dutch. Parents need to be involved in instruction in both English and Dutch 
in the home. Once policy is in place and the research has been done, a campaign needs to be organized 
to involve parents in education.‘  
 
 ‘Teachers wonder what happens to the students who begin spelend onderwijs in Dutch in the 
lower grades with such enthusiasm, but end up hating Dutch by the time they reach secondary school. 
Students have very negative attitudes toward Dutch, including those who speak Dutch at home, perhaps 
because of peer pressure to speak English. Many students just give up when faced with lessons in Dutch. 
Some refuse to speak Dutch.’ 
 
 ‘We are trying to teach Dutch as a first language, which does not correspond to the situation 
in Statia. We need to teach Dutch as a foreign language.’ ‘The teaching of Dutch in primary education is 
disorganized and in turmoil from all of the pressure being put on them by different stakeholders.’ ‘There 
is no one method, for each purpose, we use different books. There is no clear learning line for Dutch. 
When we teach subjects other than Dutch, these should not be taught in Dutch, but instead in English.’ 
 
‘When we use English almost everyone understands. With Dutch, less than half of the 
students understand. Children can pick up something in a new language better if they already know it in 
their own language. They have to get the concepts first in English.’  
 
 ‘The most important thing is to teach Dutch as fun. Students don’t see any sense in learning 
Dutch. Parents say that they can’t help their children with school because they don’t know Dutch. Many 
parents who know Dutch refuse to speak Dutch to their children. Statia is an English community, not a 
Dutch community. Even European Dutch teachers see the need for English first. ‘’The Dutch and English 
ways of teaching collide!’ 
 
 ‘The transitions from Statian English lexifier Creole to school English, and from spelend 
Nederlands and school English to school Dutch are key to making the current system work, but teachers 
feel that they don’t have the support they need to manage transitions.  
 
114 | P a g e 
 

the schools and a lack of parental involvement in their children’s education. Newsletters have been 
published, but the problem is still not solved. Parents say ‘Don’t speak Dutch, speak English.’ 
  
 ‘Students in groups 1-5 are at an age where they can easily learn languages. My students had 
English before, then they had a European Netherlands teacher who did not speak English. Now some of 
my students don’t like Dutch, but others like it. One student is confused and can’t figure out whether a 
‘letter’ is in Dutch or in English.’  
 
‘There is no continuity or consistency, no consistent guidance. Each teacher is improvising. 
Everybody is doing their own thing. There are no guidelines, no development line. The most important 
thing right now is facing this challenge all the way to groups 3-4 instead of just groups 1-2. The Dutch 
texts that we are using are not second language texts. There is no guidance for teachers for the 
transition process.’ 
 
‘The methods and system don’t fit the CITO toets. There are 2 systems of teaching in Statia, 
you have to implement the Dutch one, and the parents expect you to do the English one. The two 
systems clash. Some pre-group 5 classes are being taught mostly in Dutch, but this is just damage 
control. Children and teachers are overwhelmed by all of the things that are expected of them.’ 
 
‘Dutch speaking teachers should speak only Dutch, English speaking teachers should speak 
only English. It becomes confusing when one teacher tries to teach more than one language. The pupils 
identify the person with the language. Children should be challenged and not pushed.’  
 
‘Some Spanish speaking background children are rejecting speaking Spanish in favor of Statian 
Creole. The example was given of an 11 year old Spanish speaking pupil who failed in Dutch, learned 
limited English and forgot Spanish! He is able to read neither English nor Spanish.’ 
 
‘A SPLIKA company has been asked to make new Dutch learning lines for primary and 
secondary schools next year. There is no direct link between this research project and SPLIKA. In Holland 
new learning lines are being promoted. This research may not be finished on time to influence the 
SPLIKA project, which aims to have all methods and materials in place by 2016.’ 
 
 ‘There is no method in place for English, yet the Language Group has not been asked to do 
anything for English. Next year some schools will start using the ‘Journeys’ program for teaching English, 
but this method is not adapted to the Caribbean, and has a strong religious bias. Perhaps SPLIKA might 
develop a method to teach English that is compatible with SPLIKA. SPLIKA is also apparently working on 
a bridging method for Statia and perhaps the rest of the former Netherlands Antilles.’ 
 
 ‘Students feel very afraid about going to GvP school. They are afraid of Dutch as language of 
instruction.’  
 
‘European Netherlander teachers are ill prepared and many regret coming here. They receive 
no orientation. Some students say that the teachers who come to Statia from the European Netherlands 
are garbage. Some of these teachers have a negative attitude toward Statian students and toward the 
island in general. These teachers call the students ‘lazy’ and ‘stupid.’’ 
 
 
3.3.2 Focus Group Sessions and Interviews with Principals 
116 | P a g e 
 

take the CITO toets in English. Students tend to do better on the CITO toets in English. The teachers are 
given vocabulary tests etc. to teach to the CITO toets. To do this, the teachers go from English 
vocabulary to Dutch vocabulary.’  
 
 ‘The problem is how the transition happens from English to Dutch in secondary school. The 
book for the traffic exam given in Group 7 used to be in English, while the traffic test is in Dutch. When 
the traffic test was changed to English, the percentage passing increased. A secondary student wanted 
help in economics. The principal read the Dutch book, and explained it to the student in English and the 
student immediately understood. When students are given the chance to get the material in English 
first, they can grasp it. The best way to get the students to Dutch is via English, and the best way to learn 
Dutch culture is via our own culture. Some feel that the schakelklas at the secondary school should use 
more English for transition.’ 
 
‘There is a problem with turnover for European Netherlands teachers, who usually come to St. 
Eustatius for 3 year contracts. As soon as the teachers are oriented, it’s time to go. There needs to be an 
orientation program for these teachers. They should know more English and should be more aware of 
Statian culture. They have expressed a desire to know more. There is a need to promote Statian 
teachers. There is a need for incentives for them. Salaries are lower in Statia than in the European 
Netherlands.’ 
 
‘There are not too many students who should be in secondary school who are still in primary. 
Secondary school aged children are not usually made to remain in primary, unless psychological tests 
indicate that they have specific problems. Some older children who arrive in Statia from Spanish 
speaking backgrounds go to Grade 6 with special coaching when they first arrive in Statia, so they can 
get used to English and Dutch before they go to secondary school. Sometimes it is not wise to make 
children repeat grades in groups 5-8. Only children in lower groups repeat. ‘We try to address problems 
early.’ Internal guidance officers have helped here. Children from Spanish speaking backgrounds often 
excel, they are very eager to learn. Principals attribute this to higher motivation among immigrants. 
‘They are more motivated, and less used to getting everything that they want.’ 
  
  ‘The students need to know their history. Outreach to parents and grandparents is very 
important, parents need to be on board. It is important to make students realize that you are there for 
them. Many children need confidential attention. Children need to know that you love them. When they 
leave you, you need to maintain contact with them.’ 
  
‘The inspectors are open-minded and they maintain good channels of communication. The 
inspectors are based in the European Netherlands and they speak both English and Dutch. In general, 
the inspectors don’t give much advice on language of instruction. They concentrate more on the 
teacher-student relationship and school management. ‘Inspection is just some form of advice.’ 
‘Inspection did not impose a threshold on us’ 
 
‘According to official policy, by 2016 student performance in the European Netherlands and 
the Caribbean Netherlands need to be on par. ‘Judgments of performance must be in the hands of 
individual schools.’ ‘It will be impossible to reach par by 2016, although we can try to approximate levels 
in European Netherlands.’ Another policy states that by 2015, Caribbean Netherlands students should 
have reached ‘acceptable levels.’ 
 
118 | P a g e 
 

 ‘The use of Dutch is excluding the children from Dutch society, rather than including them. The 
Curaçaoans had to fight for the recognition of Papiamentu. It is now Statia’s turn. If you are strong in 
your own language, you will have the best chances to master Dutch.’  
  
‘All of the Primary School Board members present agree that Dutch is a foreign language for 
most people on Statia. For older generations, Dutch may have been a second language, but not for the 
present generation. ‘When teachers teach in Dutch, they are teaching to the walls.’  
 
‘The students’ identity is being lost. They need to learn about their own language and culture. 
How can you be proud of yourself when you don’t know who you are? In Suriname, all of the history 
books were changed to be relevant to Suriname. In Statia, we are always learning about someone else’s 
language, culture, history. People don’t know who they are. If our youth cannot find themselves or see 
themselves in their schooling, they will turn to drugs and other escapes from their pain.’ 
 
‘Statians have a submissive attitude toward foreigners and foreign things. Are the teachers 
expecting the students to accommodate to them, or are they accommodating the students?’  
 
‘The argument that you have to have Dutch as language of instruction or as a second language 
to give students a chance to study in Holland is misleading. Even our students who go to Holland to 
study are opting for English language universities once they get to Holland. The students need intensive 
preparation if they want to go to Holland or if they want to go to the US or another English speaking 
country. Right now students are required to have 7 hours per week in Dutch and 2, 3, or 4 hours of 
English. The first two years of secondary school can be general studies and the last two years can be 
intensive preparation for further studies.’ 
 
 ‘Children are on average 3 years behind in Maths and Dutch. More instruments and more 
expertise are needed to bridge the gap. The effects of the system are particularly felt at the secondary 
level. Much of the damage is already been done at the primary level. It is not easy to meet the 
challenge, but it is not impossible.’ 
  
‘Constant reforms and changes in the educational program are a major problem, especially in 
terms of language policy. The decision was made for English to be the language of instruction in Cycle 
One, Dutch in Cycle Two. This is pedagogically sound. This transition was not very well managed. The 
students’ Dutch is weaker because they have had fewer years of Dutch. If children have to go to the 
European Netherlands or Curaçao, they will need Dutch. The teachers don’t have the materials or the 
training and backup to manage the transition from English to Dutch. Children prefer English. It’s easier 
for them. It’s hard for parents to help their children when the lessons are in Dutch. Children tend not to 
opt for schooling in US, because most of their academic concepts are in Dutch.’ 
 
‘Children have to get academic English. English must be the main language of instruction. But 
Dutch should be the second language of instruction, not replacing English, but alongside English. ‘We 
need to meet the children with what is close to their heart. Language is emotion.’ English needs to be 
strengthened. Academic English has to be taught more and more systematically. The English exam is in 
Dutch! This is a paradigmatic example of the problem. Why are Spanish speaking children able to cope 
with English and Dutch? It’s because they have a firm foundation in their own language. ‘We are hurting 
the children’ 
 
120 | P a g e 
 

The parents present at the parents’ focus group meeting all agreed that Dutch is a foreign language for 
the majority of students in St. Eustatius, and that the goal of primary and secondary education on the 
island should be adequate proficiency in both English and Dutch to allow students to go on to further 
education in either English or Dutch speaking countries overseas. They complained that students were 
being ‘bombarded with Dutch’ at the end of primary school and secondary school before they had 
adequate preparation to handle it. They agreed that the distinction between Statian English and 
Standard English in terms of form and appropriate context for use should be made from the earliest 
years of education, with Standard English being used in the schools. The role of pre-school education 
was also stressed in introducing children to Standard English as a second language and Dutch as a 
foreign language. Parents sometimes struggle in helping their children with their assignments when they 
are given in Dutch, and requested that things be done to bring the school and the students closer to the 
parents, instead of pushing them apart. They suggested that classes in Dutch be offered for parents. 
Many of the people attending the meeting were very worried about the number of 
consultants who come to St. Eustatius and make recommendations without consulting the population of 
the island and the relevant stakeholders. Parents were also concerned about how the recommendations 
made by the Research Team will be implemented, because in the past, educational reforms have not 
been implemented very effectively, particularly in the area of coaching teachers and institutions. People 
were very concerned that the report will be completely ignored by the government and that the voices 
of the people of St. Eustatius will not be listened to. One member of a primary school board who was in 
attendance was extremely concerned about how any transition would be made if a new policy were 
implemented. Concern was raised about the number of parents in attendance at the meeting, but the 
Research Team made the people at the meeting aware that a high percentage of parents had actually 
filled out the questionnaire before the meeting. 
According to one parent, a survey was carried out in St. Eustatius in 1984 on the language of 
instruction. The outcome of the survey was that the majority was in favor of Dutch as language of 
instruction, because people wanted their children to go on to Holland to study. The results of Dutch as 
language of instruction are seen by this parent as a failure, because according to her, by 1999 there 
were only 5 Statians with higher education working in the government. ‘Dutch means failure in 
education.’ Parents are very concerned about the CITO toets because they feel helpless to assist their 
children.  
 
‘My daughter loved Dutch in the primary school, but when she got to the moment that Dutch 
was imposed in school as a language of instruction, my daughter’s grades in Dutch dropped and she 
began to refuse to speak Dutch with me. When she got to secondary school where the language of 
instruction is in Dutch, she began writing her answers in English. Now she avoids Dutch. The secondary 
school has nothing on paper concerning language policy.’ 
 
‘My nephew opted to take his CITO toets in mathematics in English, but couldn’t cope with the 
test, because he had never been taught the key concepts in English. There needs to be consistency in 
the system. I think that Dutch is important, but it needs to be a strong foreign language. My children are 
learning some Dutch. As a parent, when children are given home work in Dutch, there is a problem 
because the parents are used to speaking English, even those who have lived in Holland. This cuts 
children off from their parents, even from Dutch speaking parents.’  
 
‘My child did extremely well in primary school, but when he got to secondary school, he was 
put in a Schakelklas, and he started feeling like a failure and totally lost interest in Dutch. ‘He now has no 
interest in studying for the Schakelklas, because no matter how hard he tries to study, he always gets a 
failing mark. For example: he tried hard to learn his 20 vocabulary words per week (often without having 
122 | P a g e 
 

‘My daughter is in Group 4 with a European Dutch teacher. She gets Dutch in school and now 
she’s teaching her father. Children pick up languages so quickly and they love it. The students are also 
singing songs in Papiamentu. The children even pick up Papiamentu ‘attitude’. But eventually, the 
excitement disappears. As they go on, the excitement and enthusiasm wane. Why? One reason is that 
there is no Dutch in the environment to reinforce the Dutch learned in school.’ 
 
‘I speak Dutch with my children. I don’t agree that for the first four years English is given as 
the language of instruction. Before, teachers used to speak only Dutch, and we were not allowed to 
speak English. So now students don’t get enough Dutch at the primary level. My children won’t answer 
me in Dutch any more. They are not as fluent as before. They conjugate the verbs wrong. English is not 
taught properly. Spanish children come here with a strong base in their language, a strong foundation 
and they succeed. Children need more training in proper English.’ 
 
‘Dutch is going over the heads of the students. I was always of the opinion that in order for 
Dutch to work, you need to start as early as possible. I have a 7 year old son, he is just learning the 
sounds. He is also starting Dutch. Seeing him trying to master reading in Dutch before he has mastered 
reading in English, I see where the problem lies. Because our students can go on to further education in 
either English or Dutch, we should give parents a choice: two primary schools in English, two in Dutch, 
with two tracks at secondary school. There are challenges with sending students to study in English 
because it’s less expensive to study in the European Netherlands.’  
 
‘I speak English with my children. It’s good to get spelend onderwijs in Dutch It’s easy for me to 
talk with my children in English. My ‘love language’ with my children is English. Children need more 
training in ‘proper’ English. Guyanese teachers are very strong in ‘proper’ English. The problem with 
Guyanese teachers is that they don’t know Dutch. They aren’t familiar with the Dutch approach to Math. 
The materials from the US use periods and commas in the opposite way from Dutch when denoting 
quantities in money. This results in even more confusion.’ 
  
‘The only solution that is left [for parents] is to pay for private tutoring in Dutch. My child had 
a whole year of a Guyanese teacher teaching him in Math. That whole year I had to pay a private tutor in 
Math. There are even differences between the English handwriting and the Dutch handwriting. There is 
no consistency. There are no specific methods and learning lines in place. There are not enough 
assistant teachers to help, only 3 per school. Once you put a system in place, you have to take the 
financial constraints into consideration.’ 
 
‘Another problem is the report cards of the children. You get a bunch of papers, but there is no 
overview, with averages. Now it’s hard to get a general picture of how your child is doing.’ 
 
 ‘Parents need to assist. They need to speak more Dutch at home and go to the library. The 
language of instruction should be English at the beginning with Dutch as a second language from 
Kindergarten. Everyone wants the children to excel in both languages and in school in general. Youth 
wants everything fast. Many don’t want to do longer term studies. Statia has produced doctors, lawyers, 
nurses, all careers that involve long term study. Our children give up. They don’t have the push, they 
don’t stand up and fight. Before we used to leave the island at 12 years old, we had to fight and struggle. 
The language barrier makes students give up. Statia is not producing enough professionals.’ 
 
‘Because my son has a good foundation in English, he has no problem learning Dutch, even 
though we don’t speak Dutch at home.’  
124 | P a g e 
 

Buzzy Bee Early Childhood Education Center: The Buzzy Bee Center provides child care 
from 7h00 to 18h00 (primary school is from 7h00 to 13h00). Because day care does not fall 
under the Department of Education, there are a lot of missed opportunities for coordinating 
with the primary schools. The Education Center for Excellence has been doing its best to involve 
Early Childhood Education as much as possible with its work at other levels. For some time, 
Buzzy Bee was trying to introduce basic Dutch. But the Dutch teacher no longer works at Buzzy 
Bee, so the Dutch lessons are no longer given. Of 106 students in the school, there are no more 
than 10 Dutch first language students, 4-5 Spanish first language students, and few Dutch 
second language students. The center has 27 staff. About 90% of the children on the island 
come through the center. There is a waiting list, but it is not too long. Some parents find it hard 
to pay (0-2 years $150/month full day; $80 per month half day; 3-4 years old $125 full day; $75 
half day – all including food). Parents get no help from the government. The government does 
support salaries. The majority of children come from single parent families, many live with 
extended family members. English is the main language used at the center. The center has 
students that speak Spanish, Papiamentu, and some Dutch, and those teachers who have some 
knowledge of these languages do their best to use these languages with these non-English 
speaking students. 
Probation Office: This office provides followup services to youth and others who have 
been processed through the criminal justice system. 
Senior Recreation Center: This center is a lively venue for daytime activities and 
interaction among the senior citizens of St. Eustatius, who are not only the grandparents and 
great grandparents of today’s students, but who also represent a living memory bank of 
experience with education in St. Eustatius over the past century. 
 
Quotations from focus groups meetings and interviews held with personnel and stakeholders in these 
seven agencies are listed below in random order, with each agency assigned a letter to protect 
anonymity. The focus groups and interviewees were all of the opinion that the current situation in terms 
of language and education is not satisfactory, that Dutch is a foreign language in St. Eustatius, and that 
the goal of education on the island should be full academic competence in both English and Dutch. 
 
3.5.1 Focus Group Sessions and Interviews at Agency ‘A’: 
 
‘Not letting the children have their home language as their language of instruction is considered 
by people from the United Nations as a form of child abuse.’ 
  
‘A major reason for underperformance in students is the language. A major problem on Statia 
is that children lack self esteem. Their language and culture are demeaned. They feel bad about 
themselves. Saba students are achieving higher levels in school because they use English in the 
classroom.’ 
 
‘There is a big brain drain from Statia. People with higher education stay off island. Therefore, 
we need to import professionals. But when they come here, they often have a negative attitude toward 
Statia. In Saba, the teachers are from English speaking countries in the Caribbean and elsewhere.’ 
 
‘Expatriates and expatriate teachers tend to adopt a negative attitude toward Statia and by 
extension to their students. The highest quality teachers from overseas do not come to Statia. Many 
come to Statia to escape their problems in the European Netherlands. There is no orientation for 
European Netherlander teachers before or after they come. There is a danger that there will soon be 
126 | P a g e 
 

‘There needs to be a proper orientation for teachers coming from the European Netherlands. 
We used a buddy system. You could see their faces lose their enthusiasm their first year in September 
and October. Teachers from Holland need to have less pressure during their first years. But they have to 
admit that they need help first. Many teachers who come to Statia from Holland are running away from 
problems there.’ 
 
‘The GvP Vice Principal’s strength is the students, but she is not being allowed to do this any 
more, because she has so many administrative tasks. The GvP Vice Principal is having a very hard time. 
She is bypassed in decision making. Every year, more and more Dutch teachers are being brought in and 
the local teachers feel more and more to be a minority. Local teachers seem to get a European 
Netherlander teacher assigned to monitor them.’ 
 
‘The Schakelklas had a discriminatory concept behind it. The sentences that the students 
practice sometimes put the European Netherlands in a positive light and Statia in a negative light. When 
they finally introduced English at GVP, they said that Statian English was bad. So the students continued 
to have their identity under attack. Many Dutch teachers are being very disrespectful.’  
 
3.5.2 Focus Group Sessions and Interviews at Agency ‘B’: 
 
‘Creole is the spoken language in Statia. School English is not mastered by students. English is 
best as the language of instruction. Proficiency in English is the basis for proficiency in Dutch. We need 
to know how the transition is being made in Saba. We need to know how to manage the transition from 
English to Dutch in Statia. Perhaps we should have English as the medium of instruction with intensive 
Dutch classes.’ 
 
 ‘Students should be given a foundation in their own language before they are expected to 
perform in a foreign language.’ ‘Students are getting a negative attitude toward Dutch. ‘Teachers from 
Holland are expecting the students to perform in Dutch as L1 or L2, not as FL. Most of these teachers 
aren’t trained to teach Dutch as a FL. When the students don’t perform, the teachers tell them ‘You 
should know that.’ The students feel like failures, because they are foreign language learners of Dutch, 
not L1 or L2 learners.’ 
  
‘It is important to start with Dutch as foreign language very early. Schakelklas would not be 
needed if the spelend onderwijs is done properly. Submersion is not working. Students don’t like it. Cycle 
2 of primary school should work more closely with the secondary school. Dutch is being taught as if it 
were a first language, it should be taught as a second language. A stakeholder who just recently 
returned to Statia after many years in the European Netherlands thinks Dutch is the best medium of 
instruction for secondary school, another stakeholder thinks English would be best. ‘If you don’t speak 
the Dutch, you gonna be in trouble!’ ‘How can you master another language if you don’t know your 
own?’ 
 
The transition to schakelklas is too sudden. If a switch is made to English in secondary, the 
system has to change. Government has to make sure that government as an employer does not insist on 
high levels of spoken and written Dutch. Right now, if you want to work as a teacher or a social worker, 
you have to be proficient in Dutch and English.  
 
‘There is a problem with the CITO toets. Parents on Statia don’t have the resources that 
European Dutch parents have to train their children to take the CITO toets. The test comes from the 
128 | P a g e 
 

school, they aren’t trying hard enough. I tell them that they have to put more energy into making the 
best of what they have.’ ‘Students really need rules. They need to know the boundaries.’  
 
‘In Statia and Saba until 1982, there was no secondary school. The parents who stayed behind 
never learned to cope with adolescents. When secondary schools were finally built, people did not know 
how to cope with adolescents.’  
 
‘In Saba, people are very proud and fight for their youth. You can’t go to Saba and tell the 
people that they are doing something wrong. There is a lot of bias between Sabans of European and 
African descent. But Sabans do not bring these problems out in public. This is not so true in Statia.’ 
 
 ‘When TV and the internet arrived in Statia, the young people were exposed to a lifestyle that 
depends on having a lot of money, so they want to get rich quickly. So, they begin to get into negative 
activities to make quick money.’ 
 
‘You cannot pressure a child. You have to wait until they themselves see what they need to do. I 
never forced my children to read books. My children saw me read a lot of books followed my example.’ 
 
‘Most parents are just existing, living from day to day. Last year, we had 14 girls pregnant under 
the age 18 with most of the fathers over the age of 30. In Saba, the rate is not so high. The home 
environment is not giving the right messages to the young people. Before, parents went to school in 
order to discipline their children in front of the teacher. Now, parents come to school to discipline the 
teacher in front of their children.’ 
 
3.5.4 Focus Group Sessions and Interviews at Agency ‘D’: 
 
‘In the ABC islands, Dutch is more important than in Statia, because here English caters to 
peoples’ needs. Maybe students can be split up into those who want to school abroad in English and 
those who want to school abroad in Dutch. Of course, in the European Netherlands, many university 
courses and textbooks are in English. People are reacting against the perceived imposition of Dutch 
since 10/10/10. Most students give up or resist learning Dutch. There is a need to have English as a basis 
before going to Dutch. It would be better to introduce Dutch as a foreign language subject, but as a 
special foreign language subject that starts at kleuterschool as spelend onderwijs.’ 
 
 ‘There are two options, either get rid of Dutch or start Dutch from the beginning. There is a 
need to start Dutch from kleuterschool. English as the main language is probably the best option. Dutch 
should be taught as a foreign language. Just like in the European Netherlands, Statian children need to 
get a good foundation in their mother tongue (English) first. ‘I went to an English only school, with Dutch 
as a foreign language subject. This worked for me but I don’t have enough Dutch to perform in certain 
jobs. Many of my fellow students from the same English only school actually went on to succeed in 
Dutch. Some had to repeat grades, but they finally mastered Dutch. Maybe there should be advanced 
courses at the end of secondary education for those who want to go to the European Netherlands, say 2 
years of intensive Dutch and cultural orientation.’ 
 
‘Dutch is a foreign language and the goal in Statia should be to get students academically 
competent in both English and Dutch. ‘If a student does not want to go on to study in a Dutch speaking 
country, they should be able to get their subjects in English, with English as language of instruction and 
Dutch as a subject.’  
130 | P a g e 
 

‘The spoken language for youth in Statia is ‘street English’ they speak very little Dutch. ‘Statian 
English has no place in school and that students need to be trained in School English. Students address 
each other in Statian English.’ 
 
‘Teachers at the primary level speak English, many cannot speak enough Dutch (even those 
from Suriname). Secondary students can’t cope with Dutch. Transition class has improved students’ 
Dutch. But the schakelklas produces negative attitudes, because it is not compulsory for all students. 
Selection for the schakelklas is sometimes experienced as a personal failure and it extends secondary 
education for an extra year.’ 
  
‘Most teachers don’t speak Dutch. We can’t expect students to perform in Dutch if teachers 
don’t have adequate levels in Dutch. In the secondary school, teachers have to give lessons in English, 
even in Dutch classes, because students don’t have the necessary levels in Dutch. Parents who know 
Dutch don’t speak Dutch to their children. Older people speak Dutch better, because Dutch was a more 
important language before. A few families speak Dutch at home. These are normally more highly 
educated parents or European Netherlands mixed marriages, etc. Television and everything else is in 
English. There is no Dutch in the Statian environment, even less than before. There is a need for Dutch 
children’s programs on TV and radio, but it is doubtful that the young people will be willing to tune in to 
such programs. ‘The young people need more exposure to Dutch. Maybe there should be exchange 
programs with students from the European Netherlands and more entertainment programs from the 
European Netherlands. Previously, the HAVO 5 class would take a trip to the European Netherlands. 
That was good. Summer camps in Holland would be good. Students need more orientation to prepare 
them for going abroad.’  
 
 ‘Teachers from the European Netherlands experience much difficulty upon arrival in Statia. 
They need more solid preparation, at least to make them aware of cultural differences and the special 
variety of English spoken on the island.’ 
 
3.5.5 Focus Group Sessions and Interviews at Agency ‘E’: 
  
‘The way that language is being handled in the schools today is unsatisfactory and creates a lot 
of resistance. Maybe only 5% of the children will be able to do anything in Dutch in their lives. More 
children should go to neighboring islands for further education. There is a general resistance to the 
Dutch and Dutch language, because people feel that it is being imposed on them. People here have a 
history of people telling them what to do. People speak of ‘Statian identity’ but in fact the island has an 
incredibly diverse and mobile population. For many on the island, the church perhaps provides a sense 
of identity.’ 
 
‘Dutch is a foreign language on Statia. There is no consistent informal input in Dutch for the 
average Statian child. The children should get a foundation in Statian English/Standard English before 
they are expected to perform in Dutch. At GvP students are forced to learn Dutch. Some children like 
learning Dutch.’  
 
‘65% of the people in Statia have reading levels that permit them to read newspaper 
headlines, but little else.’ ‘Before, there were not a lot of Dutch teachers at the primary level, but now 
this has changed.’ 
 
132 | P a g e 
 

 
It is not difficult to work with children here. They are less ‘hardened’ than Dutch children. 
Children have a lack of stimulation. Children are not talked with, but talked to at the primary level. 
Children are automatically promoted from one grade to another at the primary level, even if they 
cannot read or write. GvP inherits these and other problems from the primary schools.’ 
 
‘Society has become more difficult for children now. We have tried to organize identity-
affirming events for Black History Month, etc, but very few students attend, because they are distracted 
by the media, the internet, etc. Maybe 70% of families have challenges that impact the children. 
Perhaps 90% of children have some challenge or another. We have many children who are depressed, 
suicidal, lacking in terms of identity, etc.’  
 
‘Before 10/10/10, there were few rules and regulations. Now there are so many rules and 
regulations, that people don’t know what to do with them. For example, there is a lot of poverty on 
Statia, but only 14 people are on welfare, even though some don’t have enough to eat. Because people 
are poorly equipped to deal with all of the new post 10/10/10 rules and bureaucracy and because they 
are ashamed to admit it, they don’t apply.’ 
 
   ‘One element that needs to change to solve these problems, is to change the language 
in school so that it corresponds to the language that the children bring from their homes. But this is only 
a small part of the solution. Parental responsibility needs to be cultivated and this has to be done among 
the youth.’  
 
 ‘The language situation is difficult. I went to the European Netherlands for 15 years, but 
arrived back in Statia from Holland one year ago, and I speak mostly Dutch and some English to my 
children. ‘I can’t stand Yankin’, I use English when I am angry with my children.’ When students reach 
the European Netherlands, they need remedial Dutch. ‘Here in Statia, not enough Dutch is given to 
equip students going to the European Netherlands. Many teachers in Statia cannot handle Dutch. 
Before, there was more concentration on Dutch. I was better prepared with Dutch when I went to 
Holland. Before, we started Dutch in Group 3. Teachers were more competent in Dutch. English is our 
home language. Especially in secondary school, the teachers want the students to be proficient in Dutch, 
but they are not prepared to do so. Teachers cannot expect the students to express themselves in 
Dutch.’ 
  
‘Teachers should understand that the European Netherlands is Dutch, but Statia has a lot of 
English. There is a need for more Dutch courses for parents and teachers. Dutch should be Statia’s 
number one language. Statia’s first language used to be Dutch, but no longer. In the future it should 
once again be Dutch. In the end, the children should master both languages.  
  
 ‘The secondary school insisted that we do our modules in Dutch. They said this is a Dutch 
school, a Dutch island, etc. I told them that the children do not have enough Dutch to express 
themselves freely. The children need to feel comfortable expressing themselves. We had a 
confrontation with the secondary school that day. We can stimulate Dutch, but we need to give the 
students the space to express themselves in English. It’s hard for the students to express their feelings in 
Dutch. During the sessions, we used English, but we picked out those children who speak Dutch to 
translate for them into Dutch. But those children don’t want to use Dutch. They want to identify with 
the other English speaking children. Children don’t like to speak Dutch. Whenever we do counseling, we 
speak English only. When a European Netherlander counselor tries to understand Statian, it is very 
134 | P a g e 
 

stayed back in Statia could go on another year. In grammar class, we learned about proper English. In 
some classes Dutch was enforced, in others no, even in grade 6. Children now have more freedom, 
many just skip classes. Before there was a strict separation between girls and boys.’ ‘Dutch is more 
important for children than English, because children need to go to the European Netherlands and there 
they will need Dutch.’  
 
‘When we were going to school, we were much more disciplined in studying. Now children 
don’t have a high regard for teachers. Before teachers had better connections to our families. Now if 
children complain, their parents might come and cuss out the teacher. It was much more difficult to get 
a scholarship before, now it’s too easy, so students are no longer trying.’ Maybe Dutch isn’t the best as a 
language of instruction, because students need to understand their lessons. But Dutch must be a strong 
second language subject. Students can learn to be fluent in Dutch in the European Netherlands if they 
go there. I had a hard time learning in Dutch. It had negative effects on my motivation and attitude.’ 
 
‘Now young people are less motivated, especially Statia-born children. Spanish speaking 
immigrants do better because they are more motivated. Men in Statia are motivated to speak Spanish, 
because they like Spanish speaking women. Many children are motivated today, but many others just 
don’t want to learn. You have to have it in your head that you want to do it, you have to be motivated. It 
has to start with the parents. You can’t wait until the children get big. You have to start young. Parents 
do not attend meetings. The ones that come are the ones who don’t need it. Maybe more social services 
are needed to address the situation in the home. People who have problems don’t want to go to public 
places to discuss their problems. Social services need to go to the homes of the people who need their 
services. Many people won’t allow social workers into their homes. They see this as getting into their 
business.’ 
 
‘Many teachers are frustrated with the students’ and parents’ attitudes. Teachers are being 
disrespected, and therefore they lose motivation. Some people like teaching, they’re not just doing it for 
the salary. They’re doing it from the heart. When they don’t get encouragement, they feel abused.’ 
 
The young ones who don’t want to learn, are the ones who drop out and have children, so 
that the negative dynamics are perpetuated over the generations. The children who do succeed leave 
Statia and they don’t come back. Government is not making it attractive. Many are told when they come 
back that they are overqualified. So those who don’t want to learn stay on the island and pass their lack 
of motivation to their children who also stay on the island. The ones who are motivated leave the island 
and don’t come back. 
  
‘What are the opportunities for adult education in English and Dutch to help the parents to 
help their children in their studies? To tackle this problem there has to be a lifelong learning approach, 
from early childhood all the way to adult education. There was an attempt to get Netherlands Dutch 
teachers from the schools to give Dutch lessons to adults, and people enjoyed it, but the teachers 
couldn’t keep it up. This was done with the approval of the Education Department. A group of civil 
servants organized themselves to perfect their Dutch, but the funding ran out.’ 
 
‘Right now the teachers come here from the European Netherlands with no idea of how life is 
in Statia. A lot of European Netherlanders come here and see Statia as a ‘backward place in Africa.’ 
European Netherlanders are shocked to see people driving in cars. They think that they are coming to 
‘help these poor natives.’ They have the best intentions, but the wrong ideas. They come like the 
missionaries before. Some European Netherlanders who were here before, come back and still think 
136 | P a g e 
 

5. Recommendations 
 
In terms of language policy in Sint Eustatius, the general results from all of the modules of the present 
research project (including the Attitude and use survey, the Narrative proficiency test, the Classroom 
observations, the stakeholder Interviews and the Literature research) have provided us with the solid 
and cross-verified empirical evidence necessary to draw the following conclusions: 
1) All stakeholders share a common goal: Maximal proficiency in both English and Dutch for all St. 
Eustatian students. There is a common misperception, however, that teaching a foreign 
language such as Dutch in St. Eustatius as a first or second language, or using Dutch as a medium 
of instruction or initial literacy will automatically yield better results than teaching Dutch as a 
foreign language. 
2) Because English is a first or second language of the majority of students and is a language widely 
used in daily life in St. Eustatius, maximal academic proficiency in English has been shown to be 
best achieved when it has been used as the language of instruction in the schools of St. 
Eustatius, and not simply taught as a language subject.  
3) Because Dutch is a foreign language for the majority of students and is a language rarely used in 
daily life in St. Eustatius outside of school, maximal informal and academic proficiency in Dutch 
have been best achieved when Dutch has been taught as a foreign language in the schools of St. 
Eustatius and when Dutch has not been used as the language of instruction (see the results from 
the primary schools in the sections below).  
4) Transitions in Primary Education from one language of instruction (English) to another (Dutch) 
have proven to be difficult and counterproductive in the schools of St. Eustatius.  
5) The use of Dutch rather than English as language of instruction in St. Eustatian schools has had a 
negative impact on students’ academic performance in all subjects (including Dutch) and has 
effectively excluded the majority of them from access to quality education, as observed by 
teachers, parents, schoolboards and other stakeholders interviewed in this study. 
6) The use of Dutch as language of instruction and of Euro-centric approaches, methods and 
materials has alienated St. Eustatian students from their own language, culture, and community, 
with increasingly corrosive effects on their self-esteem at the individual level as well as on St. 
Eustatian society as a whole, with St. Eustatian students adopting an increasingly hostile attitude 
toward Dutch language and all things Dutch, as pointed out time and time again during our 
interviews with students, parents, teachers in both primary and secondary education and other 
stakeholders.  
7) Although the Schakelklas may have a positive effect in terms of the student’s attitudes towards 
Dutch, teachers observed that many students would be doing better if they were being taught in 
English.  
8) Basic pedagogical principles, such as: 1) using what students already know to introduce what 
they do not yet know; 2) establishing a solid foundation in academic competence in English 
based on their informal competence in that language; 3) building on this first language academic 
competence in English as well as on a carefully cultivated informal competence in Dutch to 
eventually establish an academic competence in Dutch; and 4) the introduction of key concepts 
in mathematics, the social and natural sciences and other subjects in a language known to the 
students before introducing these concepts to them in a language that they do not know, have 
often been violated in the schools of St. Eustatius, with predictably frustrating results for the 
138 | P a g e 
 

case, they will receive some additional hours of instruction in Papiamentu/o as a 
foreign language). 
 
The successful implementation of either of these options will depend on the following: 
1) Teachers should have systematic and dependable support in terms of training, coaching, 
supervision, and networking with other teachers.  
2) Teacher placement should be very carefully done, to ensure that no monolingual Dutch teachers 
are placed anywhere except in Dutch foreign language classes, or (if Option 2 is selected) in the 
HAVO and/or VMBO classes of the final two years of secondary school.  
3) More attempts should be made to recruit teachers from St. Eustatius and the rest of the 
Caribbean region. 
4) Teachers recruited from the European Netherlands and elsewhere outside of St. Eustatius 
should be able use English as a language of instruction. They should first undergo a 
comprehensive orientation program before they arrive in St. Eustatius, and then be assigned a 
‘buddy’ to help them to successfully adapt once they arrive on the island. Teachers should be 
encouraged to integrate into St. Eustatian society, rather than separating themselves from it. 
Teachers who integrate well should be offered contracts of longer duration than the standard 
three year contract. 
5) Relatively uniform but generally flexible learning lines which reflect best practices should be 
established with maximal input from the teachers themselves. 
6) Culturally appropriate English first language materials should be acquired and/or developed for 
the teaching of all subjects at all levels (but especially at the pre-primary and lower primary 
levels), except for Dutch as a foreign language and the subjects of the HAVO and VMBO tracks in 
the last two years of secondary education (if Option 2 is selected). 
7) Linkages between the pre-primary and primary schools should be strengthened, with the goal of 
ensuring that spelend onderwijs begins in Dutch as early as possible. Caribbean-adapted Dutch 
foreign language materials and culturally sensitive Dutch foreign language teachers should play 
a crucial role at the pre-primary level in laying the foundation for informal and academic 
competency in Dutch at the higher levels. 
8) A system should be put into place to identify, acknowledge, reward, publicize, and disseminate 
best practice by teachers, administrators, and other stakeholders. 
9) Secondary school students should have easy access to counselors and regularly scheduled 
individual and group appointments with them, to make sure that they are fully aware of their 
options in terms of tracking within secondary education and further study after graduation.  
10) More opportunities should be made available for further study in the Caribbean region (e.g. by 
creating agreements and exchange programs with Caribbean tertiary institutions), where 
students can stay and feel closer to home. Currently, there is a strong focus on the European 
Netherlands as the only possible venue for further studies. Counseling should play a key role 
here during the first years of secondary education. More opportunities should be made 
available to graduates to return and make a living in St. Eustatius. 
11) Students intending to pursue further studies should be made aware of options for study as 
geographically and culturally close to St. Eustatius as possible. Any student with plans to study 
off island should undergo a thorough orientation process. Whenever possible intake and other 
tertiary entrance examinations should be taken and passed by students while they are still on St. 
Eustatius. 
140 | P a g e 
 

21) Number of hours per week for Dutch as a foreign language: An example of how Dutch could be 
included in the curriculum as a foreign language could include the following: at least 3 hours of 
spelend onderwijs in Dutch per week in all years of pre-primary education, at least 4 hours per 
week of Dutch as a foreign language in all of the primary school years, and at least 4 hours per 
week of Dutch as a foreign language during the first two years of secondary school. During the 
final two years of secondary school, the number of hours of Dutch as a foreign language would 
vary based on the orientation of the track. 
 
 
  
142 | P a g e 
 

Faraclas, N. (1994) Taylorism, Tellerism, Triage, and First Nations. In P. O'Connor, ed. Thinking Work, 
Volume 1: Theoretical Perspectives on Workers' Literacies, Sydney: ALBSAC. 136-160. 
 
Faraclas, N. (1996) Cargo, Culture, and Critical Literacy: The Politics of Cultural Pluralism. In D. Myers, ed. 
The Politics of Multiculturalism in the Asia/Pacific. Northern Territory Univ. Press. 181-7. 
 
Faraclas, N. (1997) New Developments in Literacy in Papua New Guinea. In J. Lynch and F. Pat, eds. 
Proceedings of the First International Conference on Oceanic Linguistics. Canberra: ANU Press. 
 
Faraclas, N. (1998a) Critical Literacy and Control. In Freebody, P., S. Muspratt, and A. Luke. eds. 
Constructing Critical Literacies: Teaching and learning textual practices. London: Allen and Unwin. 
141-184. 
 
Faraclas, N. (1998b) El desafio de la educacion indigena en el contexto del desarrollo, el poder y la 
identidad. In L. King, ed. Nuevas Perspectivas en la Educacion de Adultos para Pueblos Indigenas.  
 
Faraclas, N. (2011) Presentation Series on Developments in Literacy in the ABC Islands. Aruba, Bonaire, 
and Curacao. Powerpoint. June, 2011. 
 
Freire, P. (1993) Foreword to P. McLaren and P. Leonard (Eds.) Paulo Freire: A Critical Encounter. 
London: Routledge, ix-xii. 
 
Freire, P. and A. Faundez. (1989). Learning to Question: A Pedagogy of Liberation. New York: Continuum. 
 
Gee, J. P. (1991). Social Linguistics and Literacies. London: Falmer Press. 
 
Gee, J. P. (1992a, February). Social gravity, discourses, and education. Paper presented to the Louisiana 
State University Department of Curriculum and Instruction. 
 
Gee, J. P. (1992b). What is reading? Literacies, discourses and domination. Draft. 
 
Giroux, H.A. (1993). Paulo Freire and the politics of postcolonialism. In P. McLaren and P. Leonard (Eds.) 
Paulo Freire: A Critical Encounter. London: Routledge, 177-88. 
 
Krashen, S. (1985). The input hypothesis: issues and implications. New York: Longman. 
 
Lambert, W. E. (1977). The effects of bilingualism on the individual: Cognitive and sociocultural 
consequences. In P. Hornby (Ed.) Bilingualism: Psychological, social and educational implications. 
New York: Academic Press. 15-27. 
 
Lankshear, C. & P. McLaren. (1993). Introduction. In C Lankshear & P. McLaren (Eds.), Critical Literacy: 
Politics, Praxis, and the Postmodern. Albany: S.U.N.Y. Press. 
 
Lankshear, C. (1992). Literacy, Schooling, and Revolution. London: Falmer Press. 
 
Lankshear, C. (1993). Functional literacy from a Freirean point of view. In P. McLaren and P. Leonard 
(Eds.) Paulo Freire: A Critical Encounter. London: Routledge, 90-119. 
 
144 | P a g e 
 

Trudgill, P. (1999). Standard English: what it isn't. In T. Bex, & R. Watts, Standard English: the widening 
debate (pp. 117 - 128). London: Routledge. 
 
Vedder, P. (1987) Learning in a second language. A study in Curaçaoan primary schools. Curaçao: 
Kondesa.  
 
Vélez, J. (1999). Toward a language policy that addresses Puerto Rican reality. Milenio: Revista de Artes y 
Ciencias 3, 74-83. 
 
Vygotsky, L. (1978) Interaction between Learning and Development. In Mind and Society. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 79-91. 
 
Weber, J.-J., & Horner, K. (2012). Introducing multilingualism: a social approach. London/New York: 
Routledge. 
  
146 | P a g e 
 

Appendix 1.1 Questionnaire for pupils in primary schools 
 
148 | P a g e 
 

 
Appendix 1.2 Questionnaire for students of the Gwendoline van Putten School 
 
 
150 | P a g e 
 

 
Appendix 1.3 Questionnaire for Teachers 
 
152 | P a g e 
 

Appendix 1.4 Questionnaire for parents and the general public 
 
 
154 | P a g e 
 

 
Appendix 1.5 Cover letter Gwendoline van Putten School 
 
 
156 | P a g e 
 

1.4 Attitudes toward bilingualism 
  Yes Neutral No 
5. If I have children, I would want them to speak both English and Dutch 81,4 % 12,4 % 6,2 % 
27. I want my teacher to speak English and Dutch in my classes 75,3 % 9,3 % 15,5 % 
 
1.5 Attitudes toward education in English 
  Yes Neutral No 
8. I think that school should teach me to read and write in English 69,8 % 11,5 % 18,8 % 
13.  When I am older I would like to study overseas in a country where people speak English  60,6 % 21,3 % 18,1 % 
24. I would like to have my teachers to speak English more in class 39,6 % 21,9 % 38,5 % 
25. I like textbooks in English 76,0 % 13,5 % 10,4 % 
 
1.6 Attitudes toward education in Dutch 
  Yes Neutral No 
9.  I think that school should teach me to read and write in Dutch 82,3 % 6,3 % 11,5 % 
14.  When I am older I would like to study overseas in a country where people speak Dutch  53,7 % 18,9 % 27,4 % 
17.  In classes where the teacher speaks Dutch, I feel free to express myself 39,4 % 28,7 % 31,9 % 
18. When my homework is in Dutch, my parents have trouble helping me 27,8 % 20,6 % 51,5 % 
22. I feel uncomfortable speaking Dutch in my classes 38,5 % 14,6 % 46,9 % 
23. When classes are not in English I sometimes get mad and act out 21,9 % 19,8 % 58,3 % 
26. I like textbooks in Dutch 46,9 % 22,9 % 30,2 % 
 
1.7 General behaviour/well-being 
  Yes Neutral No 
21.  I am unhappy with my results in school 35,1 % 25,5 % 39,4 % 
 
158 | P a g e 
 

Appendix 2.2 Results of the questionnaires: Students in secondary education 
2.1 Overall results (all 98 students) 
2.1.1 Attitudes toward Statian language and identity 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
1. I think of myself as a Statian 37,8 % 20,4 %  17,3 % 10,2 % 14,3 % 
3. I am happy to be Statian 34,4 % 26,0 % 19,8 % 8, 3 % 11,5 % 
4. I feel close to other people from Statia 31,2 %  32,3 % 29,0 % 6,5 % 1,1 % 
11.  I think Statian English is important for the people in Statia 24,2 % 24,2 % 30,3 % 13,1 % 8,1 % 
20. The textbooks we use in school have little to do with our life in Statia 42,7 % 24,0 % 16,7 % 6,3 % 10,4 % 
 
2.1.2 Attitudes toward Dutch language and identity 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
2. I feel strong ties with the Netherlands 7,3 % 20,8 % 51 ,0% 14,6 % 6,3 % 
7.  I think Dutch is a difficult language to learn 16,1 % 17,2 % 25,8 %  21,5 % 19,4 % 
10.  I like to hear people speak Dutch 11,7 % 18,1 %  37,2 % 23,4 % 9,6 % 
12.  I think it is a waste of time to learn Dutch 7,3 % 6,3 % 18,8 % 30,2 % 37,5 % 
16. I would like to know Dutch better 34,0 % 35,1 % 18,6 % 4,1 % 8,2 % 
 
2.1.3 Attitudes toward school English 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
6. I like speaking standard/school English 25,8 % 39, 2 % 17,5 % 10,3 % 7,2 % 
15.  I would like to know English better 40,8 % 36,7 % 16,3 % 5,1 % 1,0 % 
19. I feel comfortable speaking English in my classes. 58,3 % 28,1 % 6,3 % 3,1 % 4,2 % 
160 | P a g e 
 

2.1.7 General behavior/well-being  
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
21.  I am unhappy with my results in school 13,5 % 18,8 % 36,5 % 16,7 % 14,6 % 
 
2.1.8 The importance of Dutch for carrying out certain activities 
 How important do you think Dutch is for people in Statia for ... Important Rather important Less important Not important 
28. making friends  9,3 % 25,8 % 32,0 % 33,0 % 
29. earning money & getting a job 76,8 % 20,0 % 3,2 % 0 % 
30. reading & writing  61,1 % 27,4 % 8,4 % 3,2 % 
31. watching TV 8,2 % 17,3 % 41,8 % 32,7 % 
32. using the internet 21,6 % 21,6 % 29,9 % 26,8 % 
33. talking on the phone 14,4 % 21,6 % 34,0 % 29,9 % 
34. being liked 10,2 % 13,3 % 31,6 % 44,9 % 
35.  living in Statia 18,4 % 29,6 % 22,4 % 29,6 % 
36. raising children  27,6 % 30,6 % 16,3 % 25,5 % 
37.  passing tests 86,7 % 12,2 % 1,0 % 0 % 
 
  
162 | P a g e 
 

2.2 Schakelklas (n = 32) 
2.2.1 Attitudes toward Statian language and identity 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
1. I think of myself as a Statian 34,4 % 15,6 %  21,9 % 15,6 % 12,5 % 
3. I am happy to be Statian 25,0 % 31,3 % 34,4 % 6,3 % 3,1 % 
4. I feel close to other people from Statia 34,5 % 41,4 % 20,7 % 3,4 % 0 % 
11.  I think Statian English is important for the people in Statia 22,6 % 29,0 % 29,0 % 12,9 % 6,5 % 
20. The textbooks we use in school have little to do with our life in Statia 48,4 % 9,7 % 25,8 % 9,7 % 6,5 % 
 
2.2.2 Attitudes toward Dutch language and identity 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
2. I feel strong ties with the Netherlands 3,1 % 31,3 % 46,9 % 15,6 % 3,1 % 
7.  I think Dutch is a difficult language to learn 6,5 % 16,1 % 32,3 %  22,6 % 22,6 % 
10.  I like to hear people speak Dutch 10,0 % 23,3 % 40,0 % 23,3 % 3,3 % 
12.  I think it is a waste of time to learn Dutch 3,3 % 6,7 % 13,3 % 36,7 % 40,0 % 
16. I would like to know Dutch better 45,2 % 45,2 % 16,1 % 3,2 % 0 % 
 
2.2.3 Attitudes toward school English 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
6. I like speaking standard/school English 21,9 % 28,1 % % 21,9 % 18,8 % 9,4 % 
15.  I would like to know English better 43,8 % 43,8 % 3,1 % 6,3 % 3,1 % 
19. I feel comfortable speaking English in my classes. 67,7 % 29 % 3,2 % 0 % 0 % 
 
164 | P a g e 
 

2.2.7 General behavior/well-being  
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
21.  I am unhappy with my results in school 16,1 % 25,8 % 22,6 % 16,1 % 19,4 % 
 
2.2.8 The importance of Dutch for carrying out certain activities 
 How important do you think Dutch is for people in Statia for ... Important Rather important Less important Not important 
28. making friends  12,5 % 34,4 % 28,1 % 25 % 
29. earning money & getting a job 83,9 % 16,1 % 0 % 0 % 
30. reading & writing  59,4 % 37,5 % 0 %  3,1 % 
31. watching TV 12,5 % 15,6 % 37,5 % 34,4 % 
32. using the internet 22,6 % 22,6 % 29 % 25,8 % 
33. talking on the phone 22,6 % 19,4 % 25,8 % 32,3 % 
34. being liked 15,6 % 9,4 % 40,6 % 34,4 % 
35.  living in Statia 18,8 % 40,6 % 9,4 % 31,3 % 
36. raising children  40,6 % 25 % 3,1 % 31,3 % 
37.  passing tests 87,5 % 12,5 % 0 % 0 % 
 
  
166 | P a g e 
 

2.3 First year (n = 33) 
2.3.1 Attitudes toward Statian language and identity 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
1. I think of myself as a Statian 48,5 % 21,2 %  6,1 % 6,1 % 18,2 % 
3. I am happy to be Statian 50,0 % 12,5 % 12,5 % 9,4 % 15,6 % 
4. I feel close to other people from Statia 43,8 %  18,8 % 25,0 % 9,4 % 3,1 % 
11.  I think Statian English is important for the people in Statia 36,4 % 12,1 % 24,2 % 9,1 % 18,2 % 
20. The textbooks we use in school have little to do with our life in Statia 33,3 % 42,4 % 12,1 % 0 % 12,1 %  
 
2.3.2 Attitudes toward Dutch language and identity 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
2. I feel strong ties with the Netherlands 15,2 % 21,2 % 51,5 % 9,1 % 3,0 % 
7.  I think Dutch is a difficult language to learn 13,3 % 10,0 % 10,0 %  33,3 % 33,3 % 
10.  I like to hear people speak Dutch 16,1 % 25,8 %  38,7 % 16,1 % 3,2 % 
12.  I think it is a waste of time to learn Dutch 9,1 % 3,0 % 18,2 % 27,3 % 42,4 % 
16. I would like to know Dutch better 36,4 % 36,4 % 21,2 % 0 % 6,1 % 
 
2.3.3 Attitudes toward school English 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
6. I like speaking standard/school English 15,2 % 48,5 % 24,2 % 6,1 % 6,1 % 
15.  I would like to know English better 39,4 % 34,4 % 21,2 % 3,0 % 0 % 
19. I feel comfortable speaking English in my classes. 48,5 % 30,3 % 9,1 % 6,1 % 6,1 % 
 
168 | P a g e 
 

 
2.3.7 General behavior/well-being  
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
21.  I am unhappy with my results in school 12,5 % 12,5 % 46,9 % 18,8 % 9,4 % 
 
2.3.8 The importance of Dutch for carrying out certain activities 
 How important do you think Dutch is for people in Statia for ... Important Rather important Less important Not important 
28. making friends  6,1 % 24,2 % 42,4 % 27,3 % 
29. earning money & getting a job 71,9 % 25 % 3,1 % 0 % 
30. reading & writing  62,5 % 21,9 % 12,5 % 3,1 % 
31. watching TV 6,1 % 15,2 % 51,5 % 27,3 % 
32. using the internet 9,1 % 21,2 % 42,4 % 27,3 % 
33. talking on the phone 6,1 % 30,3 % 39,4 % 24,2 % 
34. being liked 6,1 % 15,2 % 33,3 % 45,5 % 
35.  living in Statia 15,2 % 15,2 % 36,4 % 33,3 % 
36. raising children  27,3 % 30,3 % 18,2 % 24,2 % 
37.  passing tests 87,9 % 12,1 % 0 % 0 % 
 
  
170 | P a g e 
 

2.4 Combined second & third year (n = 33) 
2.4.1 Attitudes toward Statian language and identity 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
1. I think of myself as a Statian 30,3% 24,2% 24,2% 9,1% 12,1% 
3. I am happy to be Statian 28,1% 34,4% 12,5% 9,4% 15,6% 
4. I feel close to other people from Statia 15,6% 37,5% 40,6% 6,3% 0% 
11.  I think Statian English is important for the people in Statia 16,1% 22,6% 41,9% 19,4% 0% 
20. The textbooks we use in school have little to do with our life in Statia 12,5% 9,4% 12,5% 18,8% 46,9% 
 
2.4.2 Attitudes toward Dutch language and identity 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
2. I feel strong ties with the Netherlands 3,2% 9,7% 54,8% 19,4% 12,9% 
7.  I think Dutch is a difficult language to learn 3,1% 9,4% 34,4% 25,0% 28,1% 
10.  I like to hear people speak Dutch 9,1% 6,1% 33,3% 30,3% 21,2% 
12.  I think it is a waste of time to learn Dutch 30,3% 27,3% 24,2% 9,1% 9,1% 
16. I would like to know Dutch better 21,2% 33,3% 18,2% 9,1% 18,2% 
 
2.4.3 Attitudes toward school English 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
6. I like speaking standard/school English 40,6% 40,6% 6,3% 6,3% 6,3% 
15.  I would like to know English better 39,4% 30,3% 24,2% 6,1% 0% 
19. I feel comfortable speaking English in my classes. 59,4% 25,0% 6,3% 3,1% 6,3% 
 
172 | P a g e 
 

 
2.4.7 General behavior/well-being  
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
21.  I am unhappy with my results in school 15,2% 15,2% 39,4% 18,2% 12,1% 
 
2.4.8 The importance of Dutch for carrying out certain activities 
 How important do you think Dutch is for people in Statia for ... Important Rather important Less important Not important 
28. making friends  9,4% 18,8% 25,0% 46,9% 
29. earning money & getting a job 75,0% 18,8% 6,3% 0% 
30. reading & writing  61,3% 22,6% 12,9% 3,2% 
31. watching TV 6,1% 21,2% 36,4% 36,4% 
32. using the internet 33,3% 21,2% 18,2% 27,3% 
33. talking on the phone 15.2% 15,2% 36,4% 33,3% 
34. being liked 9,1% 15,2% 21,2% 54,5% 
35.  living in Statia 21,2% 33,3% 21,2% 24,2% 
36. raising children  15,2% 36,4% 27,3% 21,2% 
37.  passing tests 84,8% 12,1% 3,0% 0% 
 
  
174 | P a g e 
 

Appendix 2.3 Results of the questionnaires: Parents of students in primary education  
3.1 Attitudes toward Statian language and identity 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
1. I consider myself to be Statian 51,8% 31,6% 7,9% 7,0% 1,8% 
3.  I am happy to be Statian 49,1% 33,6% 11,8% 5,5% 0,0% 
4. I identify with other Statians 34,0% 34,0% 27,4% 3,8% ,9% 
6. Statian schools prepare students for future life in Statia 13,8% 34,9% 14,7% 29,4% 7,3% 
12. We need to preserve Statian English 18,9% 34,0% 25,5% 17,0% 4,7% 
20. The textbooks used in school have little to do with life in Statia 28,7% 30,4% 29,6% 9,6% 1,7% 
 
3.2 Attitudes toward Dutch language and identity 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
2. I feel strong ties with the Netherlands 12,3% 32,1% 29,2% 18,9% 7,5% 
5.  I am critical about the Netherlands 11,4% 25,7% 38,1% 21,9% 2,9% 
8. Dutch is a difficult language to learn 13,1% 29,9% 6,5% 40,2% 10,3% 
11. I like hearing Dutch spoken 15,5% 48,2% 28,2% 6,4% 1,8% 
13. It is a waste of time to learn Dutch 2,7% 1,8% 8,9% 48,2% 38,4% 
17. I would like to improve my skills in Dutch 28,1% 51,8% 14,9% 3,5% 1,8% 
 
3.3 Attitudes toward school English 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
7. I like speaking standard/school English 30,8% 46,7% 12,1% 10,3% 0,0% 
16. I would like to improve my skills in English 21,4% 51,8% 16,1% 9,8% 0,9% 
 
 
176 | P a g e 
 

3.8 The importance of Dutch for carrying out certain activities 
 How important do you think Dutch is for people in Statia for ... Important Rather important Less important Not important 
26. making friends  
34,3% 12,4% 20,0% 33,3% 
27. earning money & getting a job 
63,6% 23,6% 10,9% 1,8% 
28. reading & writing  
63,0% 23,1% 3,7% 10,2% 
29. watching TV 
14,8% 20,4% 38,0% 26,9% 
30. using the internet 
36,7% 12,8% 22,0% 28,4% 
31. talking on the phone 
16,7% 19,4% 35,2% 28,7% 
32. being liked 
15,4% 11,5% 29,8% 43,3% 
33.  living in Statia 
42,1% 16,8% 20,6% 20,6% 
34. raising children  
49,5% 22,9% 11,9% 15,6% 
35.  passing tests 
70,3% 24,3% 1,8% 3,6% 
 
3.9 The daily use of the main languages spoken in St. Eustatius 
 Standard /school Another 
Which language(s) do you use every day when you talk to... Statian English Dutch Spanish 
English language: ... 
36. your mother 
56,6% 31,9% 18,6% 13,3% 10,6% 
37. your father 
50,4% 29,2% 15,0% 8,0% 8,8% 
38. your brothers and sisters 
63,7% 31,0% 14,2% 8,8% 9,7% 
39.  your friends  
67,3% 36,3% 25,7% 13,3% 19,5% 
40.  your colleagues at work 
53,1% 45,1% 27,4% 13,3% 15,0% 
41. your colleagues outside work 
52,2% 34,5% 20,4% 11,5% 15,9% 
42.  strangers 38,1% 62,8% 27,4% 16,8% 14,2% 
Note: Participants were able to give multiple answers for each conversation partner, therefor the percentages in each cell represent the 
percentage of participants who answered ‘yes’ for the use of this particular language and person.  
178 | P a g e 
 

4.4 Attitudes toward bilingualism 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
25. Students want teachers to speak English and Dutch in class 28,9% 46,7% 15,6% 6,7% 2,2% 
 
4.5 Attitudes toward education in English 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
9. I think Statian schools should teach students to read and write in English 43,8% 39,6% 8,3% 8,3% 0,0% 
14. I would encourage students to study abroad in an English speaking country 19,1% 29,8% 27,7% 19,1% 4,3% 
22. Students want teachers to speak more English in class 17,8% 46,7% 24,4% 6,7% 4,4% 
23. Students like textbooks in English 19,6% 54,3% 21,7% 4,3% 0,0% 
 
4.6 Attitudes toward education in Dutch 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
10. I think Statian schools should teach students to read and write in Dutch 25,5% 61,7% 6,4% 4,3% 2,1% 
15. would encourage students to study abroad in a Dutch speaking country 0,0% 34,8% 41,3% 21,7% 2,2% 
18. When teachers speak Dutch in class students feel free to express themselves 4,4% 17,8% 20,0% 44,4% 13,3% 
19. When homework is in Dutch the parents have trouble helping the students 25,0% 35,4% 16,7% 18,8% 4,2% 
24. Students like textbooks in Dutch 0,0% 26,7% 46,7% 26,7% 0,0% 
 
4.7 General behaviour/well-being 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
21. I am unhappy with the results of Statian students 20,8% 41,7% 31,3% 4,2% 2,1% 
 
180 | P a g e 
 

Appendix 2.5 Results of the questionnaires: Teachers 
5.1 Attitudes toward Statian language and identity 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
1. I consider myself to be Statian 25,6% 12,8% 20,5% 23,1% 17,9% 
3.  I am happy to be Statian 28,9% 21,1% 34,2% 5,3% 10,5% 
5. I identify with other Statians 20,5% 38,5% 23,1% 15,4% 2,6% 
7. Statian schools prepare students for future life in Statia 7,7% 41,0% 23,1% 25,6% 2,6% 
13. We need to preserve Statian English 10,0% 25,0% 37,5% 22,5% 5,0% 
21. The textbooks used in school have little to do with life in Statia  43,6% 35,9% 7,7% 12,8% 0,0% 
 
5.2 Attitudes toward Dutch language and identity 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
2. I feel strong ties with the Netherlands 17,9% 30,8% 38,5% 7,7% 5,1% 
4.  I value my Dutch citizenship 43,6% 35,9% 17,9% 2,6% 0,0% 
6. I am critical about the Netherlands 7,9% 52,6% 23,7% 10,5% 5,3% 
9. Dutch is a difficult language to learn  0,0% 32,5% 20,0% 42,5% 5,0% 
12. I like hearing Dutch spoken 17,5% 65,0% 17,5% 0,0% 0,0% 
14. It is a waste of time to learn Dutch 2,5% 2,5% 0,0% 42,5% 52,5% 
18. I would like to improve my skills in Dutch 32,4% 29,7% 18,9% 16,2% 2,7% 
 
5.3 Attitudes toward school English 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
8. I like speaking standard/school English 18,4% 55,3% 15,8% 10,5% 0,0% 
17. I would like to improve my skills in English 20,5% 51,3% 17,9% 10,3% 0,0% 
 
182 | P a g e 
 

5.8 The importance of Dutch for carrying out certain activities 
 How important do you think Dutch is for people in Statia for ... Important Rather important Less important Not important 
26. making friends  
10,0% 12,5% 37,5% 40,0% 
27. earning money & getting a job 
40,0% 40,0% 15,0% 5,0% 
28. reading & writing  
41,0% 30,8% 23,1% 5,1% 
29. watching TV 
10,3% 5,1% 43,6% 41,0% 
30. using the internet 
5,3% 2,6% 50,0% 42,1% 
31. talking on the phone 
10,5% 10,5% 52,6% 26,3% 
32. being liked 
10,5% 7,9% 36,8% 44,7% 
33.  living in Statia 
10,5% 28,9% 28,9% 31,6% 
34. raising children  
25,6% 28,2% 25,6% 20,5% 
35.  passing tests 
71,1% 15,8% 7,9% 5,3% 
 
  
184 | P a g e 
 

Appendix 2.6 Results of the questionnaires: Members of the general public 
6.1 Attitudes toward Statian language and identity 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
1. I consider myself to be Statian 56,7% 20,0% 6,7% 6,7% 10,0% 
3.  I am happy to be Statian 51,7% 24,1% 10,3% 10,3% 3,4% 
4. I identify with other Statians 31,0% 34,5% 20,7% 13,8% 0,0% 
6. Statian schools prepare students for future life in Statia 34,4% 18,8% 15,6% 25,0% 6,3% 
12. We need to preserve Statian English 24,1% 20,7% 34,5% 6,9% 13,8% 
20. The textbooks used in school have little to do with life in Statia 46,4% 21,4% 25,0% 0,0% 7,1% 
 
6.2 Attitudes toward Dutch language and identity 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
2. I feel strong ties with the Netherlands 6,7% 43,3% 20,0% 20,0% 10,0% 
5.  I am critical about the Netherlands  14,8% 44,4% 29,6% 0,0% 11,1% 
8. Dutch is a difficult language to learn 10,0% 36,7% 6,7% 36,7% 10,0% 
11. I like hearing Dutch spoken 25,8% 41,9% 22,6% 6,5% 3,2% 
13. It is a waste of time to learn Dutch 10,3% 10,3% 6,9% 34,5% 37,9% 
17. I would like to improve my skills in Dutch 46,9% 43,8% 0,0% 6,3% 3,1% 
 
6.3 Attitudes toward school English 
 Strongly Strongly 
Question Agree Neutral Disagree 
agree disagree 
7. I like speaking standard/school English 42,9% 39,3% 10,7% 3,6% 3,6% 
16. I would like to improve my skills in English 43,8% 46,9% 3,1% 0,0% 6,3% 
 
186 | P a g e 
 

6.8 The importance of Dutch for carrying out certain activities 
 How important do you think Dutch is for people in Statia for ... Important Rather important Less important Not important 
26. making friends  
40,6% 12,5% 21,9% 25,0% 
27. earning money & getting a job 
64,5% 19,4% 16,1% 0,0% 
28. reading & writing  
70,0% 16,7% 6,7% 6,7% 
29. watching TV 
30,0% 23,3% 26,7% 20,0% 
30. using the internet 
30,0% 20,0% 33,3% 16,7% 
31. talking on the phone 
32,3% 25,8% 29,0% 12,9% 
32. being liked 
23,3% 16,7% 26,7% 33,3% 
33.  living in Statia 
35,5% 22,6% 25,8% 16,1% 
34. raising children  
41,9% 32,3% 12,9% 12,9% 
35.  passing tests 
84,4% 12,5% 0,0% 3,1% 
 
6.9 The daily use of the main languages spoken in St. Eustatius 
 Standard /school Another 
Which language(s) do you use every day when you talk to... Statian English Dutch Spanish 
English language: ... 
36. your mother 
51,5% 36,4% 18,2% 24,2% 24,2% 
37. your father 
54,4% 27,3% 12,1% 21,2% 12,1% 
38. your brothers and sisters 
66,7% 27,3% 18,2% 24,2% 15,2% 
39.  your friends  
81,8% 27,3% 39,4% 18,2% 21,2% 
40.  your colleagues at work 
48,5% 27,3% 39,4% 9,1% 18,2% 
41. your colleagues outside work 
48,5% 30,3% 21,2% 12,1% 24,2% 
42.  strangers 51,5% 39,4% 18,2% 18,2% 15,2% 
Note: Participants were able to give multiple answers for each conversation partner, therefor the percentages in each cell represent the 
percentage of participants who answered ‘yes’ for the use of this particular language and person.  
  
188 | P a g e 
 

 
Parents primary education  
 Phrasing of questionnaire isn't (always) quite clear. (13.6) 
 I want what is best for the children. (13.7) 
 I went to school with two languages and I feel both of the languages are important for our 
community. (14.14) 
 When will we know about the chosen language? (14.18) 
 Well, I would like for Holland to encourage students to study more. (14.47) 
 Dutch should be the first language in school, because children learn English at home and in there 
social environment that surrounds them. (15.7) 
 Thanks for the opportunity for the survey. (15.12) 
 I believe the questionnaire did not truly reflect the problems facing our children here on the island. 
Statian English is not the focus. (15.13) 
 Add to the second set or questions [about the importance of Dutch]: 35.a Verify the law 35.b Check 
on government 35.c Understand the history of Statia. (15.19) 
 Concerning the form: ‘Neutral’ + ‘I don't know’ should be two separate columns. Concerning the 
language of ed. [education]: I managed to do it (and my two sisters) with no help from my parent 
who could not speak Dutch. There should be more emphasis on Dutch in the younger kids and then 
high school won't be so difficult. The teens need to put more effort into learning Dutch with or 
without parents' help. (15.27) 
 I think Dutch should be spoken too from the daycare centre. It's very important and also when going 
secondary schools you know a lot more that makes the work for them more easier to understand, 
they grasp quickly and we will have a higher rate in MAVO & HAVO students at the end of the 6th 
grade. (15.29) 
 The person who wrote this questionnaire need to learn better English. (17.8) 
 Students have to learn Dutch at school, Statia is now part of the Netherlands. Nevertheless, English 
should not be abandoned, it is a major language also. It is so easy for young children to learn several 
languages; Statia should not miss that opportunity! (17.11) 
 Children are able to study (learn) several languages at the same time. It's a unique gift to speak 
different languages. Statia's culture should be preserved as well. Therefore, children should be 
encouraged to speak “Statia English" outside the classroom. At school, teachers should teach them 
"proper" English and Dutch. (17.12) 
 My daughter's teacher is teaching/ talking both English and Dutch in class, which works fine. Both 
English speaking kids and Dutch speaking kids learn the other language. (17.15) 
190 | P a g e 
 

are confronted with testing from NL for examinations. If the exams were in English the results would 
be better. (11.28) 
 The Dutch language is important for students seeking higher education in the Netherlands. It 
broadens study possibilities for students. Don't limit the Dutch language, please! Please don't 
promote anything called Statia English that is street talk , let's focus on proper English. (11.30) 
 Dutch is important for the students but the way it is being taught is the problem for the students. 
And this may be the problem for students in other subjects. (11.32) 
 If you start at the kindergarten, it will be easier. (11.36) 
 Some years ago, the language of instruction was changed to English (FBE). Now for the majority of 
students the abrupt change back to Dutch was during their exam year which made it very difficult. 
Children became confused. Not mastering the English or Dutch language. Both languages are 
important seeing that we are of Dutch origin. But educators must also understand the children will 
think in their language which is English. (11.39) 
 Too general. (11.41) 
 In my opinion there is no such thing as Statian English, what would you call the Dutch that is spoken 
by the locals, then, Statian Dutch? What is Standard English, is that American or British English? I 
believe Dutch should remain the language of instruction and American English should be taught as 
we are mostly influenced by the Americans (books, internet and television). (11.43) 
 Our language is our identity, so it is important that one learns the language that you grow up 
speaking and things about your country (History). Know who you are and where you come from. 
Teach Dutch in school, but books must be in English, so our children have a better chance. (11.45) 
 Our children should have the opportunity to choose where they would like to further their studies. 
There should be more grants offered to study in the region. We just have to facilitate them in this 
choice. A firm language foundation is here the key. (11.46) 
 
General public  
 Start Dutch from early in schools. (12.4) 
 Some children like class start at 8:00AM. (12.10) 
 We should learn to speak Dutch even if we don't like it. (16.2) 
 I believe that English instruction will make it easier for our children, but the question is why are we 
trying to make it easier for them. Our children need to "put out"; they need to make an effort too; 
they need to strive too. We did it and we are all better off for it. Let the instruction remain "Dutch". 
(16.6) 
 
  
192 | P a g e 
 

Appendix 3.2: Inventory of narrative proficiency assessments 
 
94 participants from the 4 primary schools on the island: 
Bethel Methodist School groep 7  15 
    groep 8  20 
Golden Rock School  groep 7  9 
    groep 8  8 
SDA School   groep 7  12 
    groep 8  15 
G. de Graaf School  groep 7  10 
    groep 8  5 
 
83 participants from the Gwendoline Van Putten secondary school: 
    Schakelklas A  12 
     Schakelklas B  9 
    Schakelklas C  9 
    HAVO 1  20   
     1 VMBO K&T 13 
     B1   8 
    T3AC   12 
  
194 | P a g e 
 

DE3: GvP 14yr old boy in class VMBO K&T1, MT English 
 
Dutch: 
man steelt tas rent weg politie 
gezien en anchtenna gegaan opgepakt  
tas terug geleverd 
English: 
thief took bag and ran away police 
caught sight and started a chase 
caught him and returned the bag 
 
DE4: GvP 14yr old girl MT Papiamento VMBO K&T 1 
Dutch: 
Een vrouw was aan de strand met een tasje in ze hand, 
dan heeft een stomme dief zijn tasje gestolen. 
darna heeft een politie de man gezien, hij was achter de  
man rennen en hij heeft de dieg gepakt en de tas weer 
naar de vrouw geven. 
English: 
a woman was walking on the road than a thief 
took her bag and started running a cop saw him 
and started chasing him the cop catch him 
and gave the woman back the bag 
 
DE5: GvP 13yr old girl MT English Schakel B 
 
Dutch: 
1. Een vrouw loopt en een man heeft haar tas 
gepakt, en rent weg van haar. Een de politie 
man heeft de man met de tas gezien. Denken 
dat het is zijn tas. Dan “Help! Help!” roep de  
vrouw tot de politie man. “Hij heeft mijn tas gepakt.” 
Dan heeft de politie de dief gevang. De dief maakt 
196 | P a g e 
 

het politie was achter hem. Het politie hebt hem gevang 
en ze geeft het tas terug naar Jane” 
English: 
On January 3rd, a man name John stoled a bag from  
a lady name Jane. While John ran but the police was behind 
him. The police caught him and gave the bag back to Jane. 
 
DE8: 15 yr old boy in T3AC MT Spanish 
Dutch: 
De man heb gestolen de tas van de meisje. Ze ren boven  
de straat. De politie zie de man rennen met de tas. 
De meisje bel de politie en zeg aan de politie dat de man 
gaat met haar tas. De politie ren achter de man. De  
politie neemt de man en breng de man naar  
de meisje en ze geeft de tas terug. 
English: 
The man steal the lady bag. He run’s up 
the road. The police saw de man running with 
the bag. The lady called the police and told the  
police that the man got her bag. The police run 
after the man. The police caught the man and 
bring him back to the lady and she got her 
bag back. 
 
DE9: 16 yr old Boy in T3AC MT English 
Dutch: 
Dit verhaal gaat over een jonge wie hebt een meisje tas gestolen 
en hij rent op straat en de politie hebt hem gezien en hij rent achter hem 
om de jongen en de gevangen nis te zetten de politie heeft de jonge gevang 
en hij geeft the vrouw zijn tas terug 
English: 
This story is going about a boy who stole a purse from a lady 
and was running on de road to get away and the police spotted 
him and ran after him he caught him and gave the purse back  
to the lady 
198 | P a g e 
 

nd he wan and then a police officer ran behind after him and chased him down 
and took him too jail and returned the purse too the lady and she was happy. 
 
DE 13: 11 yr old boy groep 7 BMS MT English 
Dutch 
the de dief teft the mashe pers end the man ran down 
the de roed and de poltie poletie ran er after de man 
en de pilitie ran de man end the politie carry 
back de pers and that’s the End 
English: 
the tefe a tef tick a woman pers and he ran down  
the road and the polece see him and the police 
ran after him and they catch him and carry back 
the pers and she was happy the end 
 
DE14: 12 yr old Girl groep 8 BMS MT English, Papiamentu 
Dutch 
De dame heeft een tas. Daar was en dief! Hij dief het dame 
tas; De politie kom op het (scene), de politie ziet het dief. 
De politie vangt de dief en hij brengt de tas tot de 
dame en de dame was blij. Ik denk dat de dame zegt  
Dank u! De dame was dansen in de straat en dat 
(mean) zij was blij. (When) de dief (thief) haar tas 
ze was bang nu (since) het politie heeft haar tas van 
de dief zij was blij. Deze dame heeft spullen in 
haar tas en geld. Deze dame (was) bag bang dat  
de dief (thief) (it) het geld. Waar Wie is en dief? 
Een dief is en persoon wie (thiefs) spullen. 
English 
The thie lady have a bag. “There was a thief.” The He thief 
the lady bag. The police came on the scene, the police 
see the thief and the police catch the thief and he 
bring the lady bag. And the lady was happy, I think 
that the lady said “Thank you”. The lady was dancing 
in the street and that means she was really happy. When 
200 | P a g e 
 

dan heeft de politie heeft de man gezien en hij rent 
achter die man. hij heeft de man gepakt een he trekt  
de tas van de mevrouw een geeft het terug. 
English: 
a man stole a bag from a lady and ran with it 
and de police saw him and he ran after the  
man and caught him and took the bag from 
him and gave it back to the lady 
 
DE1814 yr old girl in B1 GvP MT ? 
Dutch: 
De man stole een vrouw tas en hij ren en de politie 
see him en de politie ren achter hem en get him en 
geeft ze terug haar tas 
English: 
The take man took a woman purse and run and  
the police see him and the police ran after  
him and caught him and give the woman  
her purse. 
 
DE 19: 14yr old boy in B1 GvP MT? 
I don’t the dutch 
 
A man stole a woman purse 
and the he run. The police 
saw him and chase him nd caught 
him and she got her purse 
 
DE20: 13 yr old boy in Schakelklas A MT EN & SP 
Dutch: 
Een vrouw was aan te lopen en een dief pakt 
haar tas en rent weg. En police officer heeft hem 
gen gezien en rent achter hem until he catch and gave  
her the lady her bag back. 
202 | P a g e 
 

him and he was running in the back of the 
thief and the police cach him and the lady got back her purse 
 
DE23: 10 yr old boy groep 7 GdG MT Dutch 
Dutch: 
Er was een vrouw die liep op de weg, er kwam 
een dief. hey! mijn tas! Hahaha! zei de dief, hij  
rende weg. Toen zag een politie hem en zij: dief! 
hij rende achter de dief aan, na een kwartier zij hij, 
ik heb je te pakken! Hij hield de dief aan en gaf 
de tas aan de vrouw. 
English: 
Once upon a time there was a thief, the thief liked 
to steal things. He saw a woman and said: 
Haha! I got your purse! He ran away over a 
road. Then a cop saw him and said: thief! 
he ran behind the thief and after 15 minutes 
he said I got you! He hold the thief and gave 
the purse to the girl 
 
DE24: 10 yr old Boy groep 7 GdG MT? 
English: 
One day a lady was talking on her 
phone and a thief toke her purse 
yelled for help and policeman hered 
her yelling he came and she told him 
about the thief abd which way he went 
the policeman saw the thief and he chased 
him and coth the thief and he retuord 
the pure to the lady. 
Dutch: 
één dag een mevrouws tas was bij een 
dief the dief had de tas en een politicman 
had de dief jail and de mevrouw har tas 
 
204 | P a g e 
 

her where she was walking. So a thief came and stole 
her purse. She ran after the man and heran up the 
road. He ran infront of a police and the woman told  
the police that he had her purse. So the police ran after 
the man and he caught him. The woman had her bag 
again and she was very very happy. 
 
DE28: 13yr old girl in HAVO 1 GvP MT? 
Dutch: 
Een jongen had een meisje handtasje gestolen 
en hij heeft weg gerennen en de politie 
had hem gezien en de politie heeft 
acher de jongen gerennen en wanneer 
de politie de man (catched) had de  
vrouw haar handtasje terug gekrijg 
English 
A boy stole a girl perse and ran away 
with it and the police saw him and 
ran behind him and when the police 
caught catched him the lady girl got het 
perse back. 
 
DE29: 13yr old girl in HAVO 1 GvP MT English 
Dutch: 
Er was een meisje niet vrolijk en een man vrolijk 
en de man ging op weg. De politie ging na hem 
rennen en heeft hem gepakt en de vrouw was 
Wee vrolijk. 
English 
There was a lady upset and a man happy and 
the police came after him and catched him and  
the girl was happy 
 
  
206 | P a g e 
 

off with it. He run up the road then the police see him 
then the police start running after him. Then he 
catch him and give the woman back her  
purse. 
Dutch: 
Ik heb een man gezien stiekem de mevrouw tas te 
pakken. Dan heeft hij gerennen dan heeft hij de  
politie gezien. Dan heeft de politie hem gerennen 
dan heeft hij de man ge pakt. Dan geeft hij de 
tas aan de vrouw. 
 
ED2: 12 yr old girl in Schakelklas B MT English 
 
English 
English 
A Man (thief) stole a woman’s bag. He ran  
down the street with her bag. Then a  
police man was there and saw everything 
and when the thief past the policeman and 
kicked him in his head then the policeman 
ran behind the thief and cathed him then 
luckily the woman got her bag back. 
Dutch: 
Dutch 
Een dief had een mevrouw’s tas gestolen. 
De dief had de straat gerennen. Een politie was 
in de straat. De dief had de  
politcie gestoten. Dan kregt de mevrouw 
haar tas terug. 
 
ED 3: 16 yr old boy T3AC MT English 
English: 
The boy that is running from girls because he is afraid of them and  
he might be gay and he stole the handbag. So he continue runnin so then the police 
208 | P a g e 
 

Dutch: 
de man heeft gerennen met de vrouw  
tas dan de politie ren achter hem. An heb hem gecatchen an 
geeft de tas an de vrouw. An dan de vrouw was blij  
want ze heb je la haar tas again 
The End 
de Eind 
 
ED7: 14 yr old girl B1 GvP MT? 
English: 
A women was going for a walk and 
the a man take her pers bag but she, 
try to get her bag back but she couldn’t 
ask for help because the police didn’t understand  
the language that she was speaking. 
So then she try it in a diffiren langu 
language so she get her bag back 
Dutch 
a een meijese jef was loopen lopen en  
een man gesolen haar seleg sleeg een 
he juf ge neit gepraten de language 
so. 
 
ED8: 14 yr old boy in B1 GvP MT? 
English: 
the woman bag got stolen en the teaf went runing en de cop 
saw him runing en ?? ran after him en he kot him en  
den give de women back her bag. 
Dutch 
de vrouwvrouw heeft stoken en the teaf went runing en de sop 
saw him runing en ran after him en he kost en ????? 
den give de women back her tas 
 
  
210 | P a g e 
 

the politie saw him the polietie rennen by the 
dief de polietie gut him De polietie give back  
de meisje purse 
 
ED12: 12 yr old girl groep 8 GdG MT English 
English: 
I see a lady standen up nex to a man the man tief 
her perst and run white it then a police can ketch 
the man and then the lady gat her perst back she was 
so so happy to get her perst back 
Dutch: 
Ik zie en vrouw bij een man het man trek zij 
tas op zijn ren bij het straat het politie comt 
bij onze en halt zijn the vrouw was blij 
 
ED 13: 12 yr old girl groep 8 GdG MT Spanish 
English: 
the man teaf the lady perst in then he stat to run in he was 
runing on the street in the past behind de police in then the policed 
see that the man was runing Beacause he teaf the lady perst so 
the police run after him trying to ketch to teafer they was 
but runing fast in then after the policeman ketch the teafer 
in give back the perst to the wonderfull lady in the lady 
was hapely ever after [smiley] 
Dutch: 
IK zee een man en een vrouw het man stref the vrouw tas 
het man pass acter het policemab in then het police zee the  
man rening met de wrouw tas en achter aan the politiman 
ren achter het man en then the politi trek het tas van the 
man den de politiman (give) het tas to de vrouw en the 
vrouw was blij ze zegt thank ye bell for mijn tas!!! 
[smiley] 
 
  
212 | P a g e 
 

and de police chases de man and after the police catches 
de man and de lady was happy 
Dutch: 
Een jongen boof een vrouw handtas en weg gerend met het 
en de politie heeft achter de man gerennen en de politie heeft  
de man gepakt en de vrouw was verliefd 
 
ED17: 12yr old Girl HAVO1 GvP MT English 
English: 
There was once a lady she was walking then 
a robber stole her handbag and he ran 
the police saw him and started to chase 
him then he caught him and safetly 
returned the handbag to the lady. 
Dutch: 
Er waren een mevrouw ze waren aan 
het lopen dan een thief heeft haar tas 
gepakt en begon te rennen de politie heeft 
hem gezien en heeft begin te rennen achter 
hen dan he caught him dan de politie 
heeft de vrouw haar handbag terug gegeven. 
 
ED 18 : 14 yr old girl in HAVO1 GvP MT English 
English: 
There was a man who stole a purse from a 
woman. 
He ran far away from her. 
The police saw him running with the bag 
and thought noticed what what just happen. 
so the police ran after him wat 
and then he caught him 
and then in the end the lady got 
back her bag 
Dutch: 
er was een man die heeft een tasje  
214 | P a g e 
 

dief got tired en start to ren slow en slow en the politce caught 
hijm en Maria got zijn tas. 
 
ED21 
11 yr old girl in groep 8 SDA MT English 
English: 
There was a lady and she was walking along the road with her purse and 
then robber came took her purse. He ran away a policeman saw him and  
ran after the robber. The policeman caught the robber and gave the 
lady her purse back. 
Dutch: 
Opens was er en dame en de dame was bezig met lopen op de weg met er 
tas. Een dief heeft de dame de taas gehaald. Een politie heeft de dief 
gezien en direct heeft de politie achter hun gerend. De politie heeft de robber 
geneemd een de politie geeft de dame hun tas. 
 
216 | P a g e 
 

