Kingdom of the Netherlands
United Nations High-Level
Political Forum on Sustainable
Development 2022
Voluntary National 
Review on 
the Sustainable 
Development Goals

This report serves as the Voluntary National Review of the 
Kingdom of the Netherlands on the implementation and 
progress of Agenda 2030 including the Sustainable 
Development Goals.
Published by: Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands 
For more information: SDGs@minbuza.nl
July 2022

9 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS – REPORT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS
5 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
The four countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
Aruba Curaçao St Maarten
Bonaire St Eustatius Saba 
1  Aruba                
2  Curaçao       
3  Bonaire
4  St Maarten 
5  Saba                  
6  St Eustatius
7
7  The Netherlands
4
6
5
2
1
3

7 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
Curaçao has made progress in measuring the SDG indicators. In movement had already emerged before the 17 goals were 
May 2016, the Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) Curaçao could adopted by the UN. The platform organisation SDG Nederland, 
measure no more than 16% of the applicable indicators. set up in 2013 as SDG Charter, now has over 1,200 member 
Currently, 28% of the indicators are available for six of the organisations, including many umbrella organisations 
priority SDGs, while coverage is expected to rise to 48% after representing  subnational authorities, the business community, 
the 2022 census. In 2017, Aruba set up an interministerial SDG- youth, knowledge institutions and educational institutions. 
Indicator Working Group (IWG) to support CBS Aruba, by Many more organisations are working actively to achieve the 
developing data to measure SDG indicators. The IWG has now SDGs. The consultations held for this VNR also presented an 
been able to measure 67 SDG indicators. Measuring SDG opportunity to engage with organisations that had been less 
indicators on nature and governance remains a challenge, aware of the SDGs up to then. 
however. In Sint Maarten data are chiefly collected separately 
by the various ministries, making integrated data management The government of Sint Maarten welcomes all support in 
difficult. A peer review, assisted by CBS Netherlands, was implementing the SDGs, so partnerships are important. By 
executed in April 2022. The independence and quality of the means of national dialogues, the government of Sint Maarten 
methods for producing statistics will be assessed. The aim is to engaged with all levels of the population to set out the direction 
explore whether more use can be made of statistical information of the country’s development. A national vision was formulated, 
and data for policy development and decision-making, and to giving priority to joint goals, and thus the SDGs. The government 
make recommendations for a future-proof national statistical subsequently invested in a process to raise awareness of the 
system. SDGs, and of the major role to be played by the private sector, 
non-profit organisations and members of the public in achieving 
them. A large-scale public awareness campaign was rolled out, 
with a prominent place for youth. 
Aruba has been active in the past few years in engaging with 
NGOs, academic institutions and the private sector. Sessions 
have been organised with various organisations to raise 
awareness of the SDGs and to provide support for efforts to 
achieve them in the relevant sectors. This greater familiarity and 
engagement with the SDGs proved to be highly productive in 
drafting the VNR. 
Prior to adoption of the SDGs, Curaçao had committed to 
engaging with a wide range of stakeholders within the process 
leading to its National Development Plan. The National SDG 
Handover of the manifest for a Sustainable Coalition Agreement to Commission facilitates three platforms, for People, Planet and 
political leaders, coordinated by SDG Nederand and partners, 8 July Prosperity, bringing together government authorities and 
2022 (photo: Roos Trommelen) stakeholders from the private sector, academia and civil society 
and youth organisations. To prepare for this VNR, sessions were 
Stakeholder involvement organised through each platform to engage with stakeholders, 
The SDG agenda cannot be achieved without a concerted effort giving the Commission an understanding of the areas in which 
from government authorities, civil society, businesses and other society is working on the SDGs. The Commission now intends to 
actors. The connecting force of the SDGs helps organisations establish a long-term relationship with these stakeholders 
work together across themes and sectors. Partnerships are of through the three platforms. 
major importance to the Kingdom. In the Netherlands, an SDG 

9 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
the European Union have agreed to work together to tackle the measures. Working with local NGOs, the government also 
consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, earmarking €750 organised emergency aid and food aid for people whose 
billion to help member states bear the costs of the crisis. livelihoods were threatened by the measures. The government 
also launched a vaccination campaign, working with the 
The COVID-19 pandemic has hit the three Caribbean countries Netherlands to ensure vaccines and staff were available. Special 
of the Kingdom harder, with shrinking economies, rising schemes were set up to give undocumented migrants access to 
unemployment and an increasing burden of debt. To strengthen the vaccination programme. The government also invested in 
the resilience of these countries’ economies and societies, expansion of hospital care in order to cope with peaks in 
Country Packages have been set up within the Kingdom infections. Here too, the Netherlands provided support in the 
containing programmes to strengthen governance and ensure form of equipment and human resources. Despite the measures, 
sound government finances and social cohesion, with the aim of the pandemic has had a severe impact on Curaçao, in three 
supporting both the economy and society, strengthening crisis areas in particular. First, the economy has shrunk, resulting in job 
preparedness and creating new opportunities for both people losses and business closures. At the same time, there has been a 
and businesses. rise in new business activity, while digitalisation of services has 
boosted various sectors. Second, the social impact is evident in, 
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on health, society and for example, increased domestic violence and school drop-out 
the economy led to serious disruption in Aruba. After the first rates. Direct emergency aid and support was needed to help 
cases were diagnosed in March 2020, the national scenario for families and groups whose livelihoods were seriously threatened 
pandemics was activated. The pandemic put huge pressure on by the crisis. Third, the impact on healthcare has manifested 
healthcare facilities, capacity and staff. A single hospital with itself in delayed treatment for non-COVID patients and delayed 
just six IC beds proved hopelessly inadequate to cope with the recovery from COVID-19 among some people. At the same 
sudden increase in patients. In February 2021, the vaccination time, demand for mental health services increased. A 
campaign was launched with the highest priority. By January transformative approach has been adopted to recover from the 
2022, 72% of Aruba’s population had been vaccinated. Due to crisis, in line with the agreements reached with the Netherlands 
the country’s dependence on tourism, the pandemic had huge in the framework of the Country Package. This means that in 
implications for the economy. The government therefore addition to direct support and aid, the country will improve 
provided support for SMEs and vulnerable groups, and this has working methods and encourage data-driven approaches.
had an impact on its budget. From 2020, Aruba has been 
receiving support from the Netherlands in the form of loans At the start of the pandemic in 2020, Sint Maarten activated the 
linked to economic, financial, social and institutional reforms to Emergency Operations Center (EOC) in an attempt to keep 
make Aruba more resilient. COVID-19 under control. Sint Maarten recorded a total of 9,629 
infections and 86 deaths up to and including the first three 
In Curaçao, the COVID-19 crisis began on 13 March 2020 when months of 2022. The lockdown has had an impact on the 
the first cases were diagnosed. Initially, a lockdown and entry economy. Various measures were introduced to prevent 
ban prevented the disease from spreading too rapidly. However, unemployment, bankruptcies and poverty wherever possible. 
when economic considerations led to the resumption of tourism With the support of several NGOs and financial support from 
infections peaked for the first time. Curaçao has now experienced the Netherlands, the government was able to distribute food 
four peaks, with some 30,000 infections in a population of packages and provide school lunches. Various initiatives were 
around 160,000. By 19 January 2022, a total of 206 COVID-19 also launched that later received government support. Finally, in 
deaths had been recorded. Curaçao introduced various the framework of Leave No One Behind, and with the support 
restrictions and protective measures to prevent infection. It also of the Netherlands, the government set up the Sint Maarten 
provided financial support for vulnerable groups – people who Stimulus and Relief Plan (SSRP), which aimed to prevent 
had lost their jobs, entrepreneurs, undocumented migrants and businesses from going bankrupt, and to safeguard employees’ 
people on benefits – and economic sectors affected by the incomes. 

11 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
government-wide 2050 Circular Economy Programme sets out Leave No One Behind
the ambitions and outlines. Working with stakeholders, the In the past five years, the world has increasingly recognised 
government has fleshed this programme out into an that inequality manifests itself in many different forms. In the 
implementation programme with five transition agendas for key Kingdom too, there is a persistent need to tackle inequality 
sectors. To ensure full circularity by 2050, the aim is to halve the and to foster inclusive societies. The social safety net is by no 
use of primary raw materials by 2030. Policy links the circular means the same throughout the Kingdom. The countries 
economy to efforts to achieve circular agriculture and a themselves are largely responsible for making their own 
sustainable food system, in view not only of SDG 2 but also of choices through legislation and regulations, and for allocating 
SDG 3 (health) and SDGs 14 and 15 (protecting diversity and the varying levels of funding at their disposal for this purpose. 
nature). At the same time, each of the four countries is strongly 
committed to preventing inequality and ensuring that everyone 
Curaçao is engaged in developing a circular economy model. can participate in society.
Since it is a small island developing state, implementation will 
pose specific challenges. While the domestic markets for Many people in Aruba are financially vulnerable because they 
recycled waste and new products are both too small, there are have no financial buffers. Aruba has an extensive social 
some small-scale, innovative and creative initiatives working on protection system, in line with the residual welfare model, with 
circularity on the island. The Curaçao Doughnut Economy, a some services delivered directly by government. However, the 
partnership between the Ministry of Economic Development, majority of social services for vulnerable groups are provided by 
the municipality of Amsterdam (the Amsterdam City Doughnut) volunteer organisations which are largely funded through 
and the University of Curaçao (UoC) represents a significant step government grants. Aruba has introduced universal healthcare, 
towards a more integrated approach. Awareness workshops with free access to good-quality primary healthcare services. 
have been organised in neighbourhoods to chart existing However, the population is ageing, increasing healthcare costs 
initiatives that contribute to the doughnut economy. This has and the burden on social services. Aruba has opted for a holistic 
led to an action plan, with nine recommendations for the approach to health and welfare, focused on social, cultural, 
minister. A think tank also meets once a month to discuss a environmental and economic determinants of health and on 
specific theme with guest speakers. Meeting the demand for existing barriers to health, with a view to ensuring that everyone 
data to support these activities is a challenge. can improve their health and wellbeing. 
The Aruban 2050 Circular Economy strategy focuses on needs Under Curaçao’s social welfare system, residents have access to 
that go beyond waste management. Aruba is integrating the good-quality care services. The wellbeing of socially 
principles of the circular economy by optimising use of natural disadvantaged groups is inextricably linked to this. Curaçao’s 
resources. Effectiveness and efficiency are being improved social security system comprises social services, benefits and a 
using innovative and ecologically responsible methods. And care system. Since the system is under considerable financial 
members of the public are being made more aware of their pressure, the Country Package focuses on reform. Everyone in 
impact in terms of waste. Curaçao is entitled to an old age pension, based on the principle 
of solidarity. Gay marriage is not officially recognised in Curaçao, 
Sint Maarten has set up a large-scale campaign under the despite a judgment given by the Court of First Instance stating 
banner ‘Reduce, reuse, recycle and recover energy and residual that anyone refusing to marry a same-sex couple is committing 
waste’, an element of which is the introduction of a ban on an act of discrimination. A bill recognising gay marriages has 
single-use plastic. The legislative procedure laying down this been before parliament since 2018. Incorporation of 
ban is currently underway. Another major initiative has been international human rights agreements in national legislation is 
launched in the energy sector, i.e. the partnership with often delayed in Curaçao because the introduction of measures 
GridMarket and the Island Resilience Partnership (IRP). to implement them puts extra pressure on available financial 
and human resources.

13 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
and Development Cooperation therefore set up the Youth During the entire SDG process, Aruba worked through various 
Advisory Council to give young people from the Netherlands partnerships. The UN system and various regional bodies 
and its partner countries a voice at the policy table. provided crucial technical assistance, contributing to the 
development of Aruba’s strategies and policies. Technical 
Due to its status as an independent country, its geographical assistance and training enabled Aruba to build local knowledge 
location in the Caribbean and shared Caribbean culture, on incorporating the sustainable development framework into 
Curaçao sets great store by partnerships in the region and with planning and policy processes, which it actively shared with 
other SIDS. Given the position of Aruba, Curaçao and Sint policy-makers from other SIDS. The government of Aruba, 
Maarten within the Kingdom, they are associate members of UNDP, and the Kingdom of the Netherlands have established a 
ECLAC and in this capacity attend its meetings on the SDGs. Centre of Excellence for the Sustainable Development of SIDS 
Within the UN structure, they fall under the Multi-Country Office in Aruba. The centre uses best practices to provide a platform 
in Trinidad and Tobago. Curaçao takes part in the civil-service for innovation and resilience in small, insular developing 
level consultations in the framework of the SAMOA Pathway countries. South-South cooperation enables these countries to 
Targets & Indicators Workshop and the UN Multi-country share knowledge of sustainable practices in areas like energy, 
Sustainable Development Framework (MSDF). The various public-private partnerships (PPPs), water management, the 
UNGA side events organised in 2017, 2018 and 2019 presented environment and tourism. 
opportunities for political participation and networking activities. 
Curaçao is a member of the UNESCO SDG-E2030 Regional The SDGs can only be achieved if we work together within the 
Steering Committee for Latin America and the Caribbean. IOM Kingdom, in our regional partnerships and worldwide through 
and UNHCR help undocumented migrants on Curaçao and also the multilateral institutions. The fact that all 193 UN member 
run projects for the local population, providing food packages, states signed up to the SDGs in 2015 bears witness to the 
protection against gender-based violence, shelters, educational capacity of the world community to act at crucial moments. 
activities, healthcare and so on. With just eight years to go to 2030, now is the time to exploit 
this capacity. The Kingdom of the Netherlands stands ready to 
Curaçao and Aruba also receive grants from the European join in the final sprint.
Development Fund (EDF) to implement projects linked to the 
SDGs. In Aruba, the funds were used to establish a sustainable 
faculty at the University of Aruba. In the 2013-2021 period, 
more than €11 million was made available for improvements to 
the infrastructure in various neighbourhoods in Curaçao. Funds 
th
from the 11 EDF will be used for resilient communities. The 
country is also involved in the Hawaii Green Growth Local2030 
Hub through participation and knowledge-sharing at political 
and civil-service level. Because of their small size, Aruba, 
Curaçao and Sint Maarten have too little capacity and too few 
funds to take part in every area and in every major partnership. 
Due to their responsibilities as independent countries, the 
knowledge existing within international organisations and 
networks is of great value to them. However, maintaining these 
networks and complying with international agreements places 
too heavy a burden on the civil service. 

15 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
relative to 2019. The measures taken by governments to contain 
the spread of the virus have taken a heavy toll on livelihoods 
and lives across the Caribbean; the economies of many small 
Caribbean islands contracted by at least 10% in 2020. Although 
governments acted swiftly to contain the spread of COVID-19, 
there was an unavoidable trade-off between saving lives and 
protecting livelihoods. 
While the Caribbean islands are working to recover from the 
impacts of the pandemic, the climate crisis is adding significantly 
to present and future vulnerabilities in terms of lives and tourism-
dependent livelihoods. On all the islands, coastal zones and 
island ecosystems – both terrestrial and marine – have degraded 
significantly in the last decades, due to a combination of climate 
change, natural disasters, tourism growth, overconsumption 
and the uncontrolled construction of coastal infrastructures. 
life (SDGs 14 and 15) and safeguarding reliable and 
Tourism growth Climate change
renewableenergy services (SDG 7) are likewise vital for 
Small island coastal GHG emissions, 
sustainable tourism in the long term, and need to be achieved 
tourism construction, pollution, heat, 
concentration, hurricane frequency and in unison. A comprehensive policy approach is a precondition 
consumption, intensity, storm surges, 
for success, but also a challenge due to limited institutional 
congestion, crowding, sea water warming, 
capacity, short-term economic needs and lack of economies of 
and contamination ocean acidiﬁcation, 
scale, knowledge and financing mechanisms to steer the 
with negative spillovers. sea level rising, and 
beach erosion.
economy in a different direction. 
Tourism is Aruba’s main economic sector, accounting directly 
and indirectly for more than 80% of GDP. Even before the 
Figure 2.1. Symbiotic relationship between tourism growth and climate COVID-19 crisis, the country was aware of its vulnerability to 
change in SITES (Peterson, 2020) shocks, which led to the Destination Development Plan (DDP) in 
2017. The aim is to make Aruba an innovative and sustainable 
Sustainable development of tourism creates scope for achieving destination for the benefit of the whole of society. One of the 
SDG 8 (sustainable economic growth and full and productive measures taken to this end is the expansion of protected and 
employment). The tourism industry can both benefit from and conservation areas. The national park, covering almost 18% of 
contribute to climate action (SDG 13). Climate-adaptive the island, has been enlarged to include additional coastal 
development is a precondition for future-proof investment while wetland areas that are important for the island’s biodiversity. By 
at the same time contributing to climate mitigation. Circularity decree, four different areas were jointly designated as Marine 
(SDG 12) offers opportunities for growth and innovation while Protected Areas, carrying the name of Aruba Parke Marino, the 
also contributing to climate mitigation. In line with SDGs 13 and first park of this kind on the island. A challenge that is still 
8, national tourism policies should take account of resilience outstanding is the integration of sustainable, circular and 
and adaptive capacity to environmental disasters, and integrate climate-proof practices into the tourism sector. Aruba’s Bucuti & 
climate action measures. Conserving biodiversity and marine Tara Beach Resort, a pioneer in sustainable tourism, has become 

17 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
institutional memory as well as net-centric information 
management. Another part of the strategy is a disaster risk 
financing mechanism. Natural disasters can cause millions or 
even billions of dollars of damage, straining national budgets 
and burdening a country for many years. The disaster financing 
mechanism will have a tiered approach, with several instruments 
to cover the financial needs at different phases of disaster 
management, from mitigation to recovery and reconstruction. 
Under the strategy Sint Maarten is also preparing an early 
warning system for hurricanes and will establish a centre of 
excellence that will offer crisis management training at different 
levels. The centre will function as a net-centric information 
Population and infrastructure are concentrated in coastal zones management platform and enable solid regional knowledge 
exchange.
of earthquakes. Furthermore, hurricanes, rough seas causing 
destruction of coastal infrastructure, rising temperatures and In Aruba extreme weather events have become more frequent 
droughts are exacerbating existing economic, institutional, over the years. Historical data show that temperatures on the 
environmental and social vulnerabilities. Each island holds the island are rising more rapidly than before, with an adverse 
policy key to its destiny. What is urgently required is a stronger impact on economic development. Likewise, sea level rise and 
focus on climate change adaptation and transitioning, and flood risk scenario modelling indicates that residential 
engaging the population and other stakeholders in these efforts. neighbourhoods, port infrastructure and tourism districts will be 
Bonaire has initiated a climate roundtable in order to develop hit hardest, with at least 40% of the population being directly 
measures in partnership with stakeholders. exposed and displaced. Aruba’s disaster management system is 
aligned with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
Disaster preparedness and the SDGs. Aruba has worked on enhancing disaster 
In September 2017, Sint Maarten was devastated by the preparedness through more effective response, recovery, 
category 5 hurricane Irma, followed by hurricane Maria, which rehabilitation and reconstruction. 
together caused an estimated $2.7 billion in damage. The 
government of Sint Maarten had to implement a disaster risk The government of Curaçao set up the Directorate of Risk 
management programme to enhance not only emergency Management and Disaster Policy in 2014 to guarantee the 
response, recovery and reconstruction, but to strengthen the protection and safety of the population. In 2017, a risk profile of 
overall disaster risk management system. This demands not Curaçao was carried out, and formed the basis for policy. It 
only ongoing commitment from stakeholders, but also high- included an assessment of the type and size of risks, and their 
level prioritisation of disaster risk management, including probability and relevance. The National Ordinance on Disaster 
management of limited capacity and resources. To this end, the Management was adopted on 1 October 2021 and addresses 
government of Sint Maarten is currently developing a National disaster and crisis prevention, risk management and mitigation, 
Disaster Risk Management Strategy aimed at prevention and especially in the preparatory phase. The approach is based on 
mitigation, as well as management of residual risks, contributing internationally agreed principles of Disaster Risk Reduction 
to greater resilience and less disaster-related damage in the (DRR), such as the five steps of the safety chain approach: 
future. The new strategy also includes the establishment of a proaction, prevention (risk management), preparation, 
dedicated Disaster Management Office, which will not only repression and aftercare (crisis management). Use of a quality 
incorporate disaster management into the daily work of assurance model guarantees accountability and continuous 
government but will also promote the alignment of different improvement, and makes performance visible. Different 
domains in regard to climate change. The office will ensure stakeholders, including the board and the crisis management 

19 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
COVID-19 crisis, the government of Sint Maarten provided Digitalisation is a common thread in all the Country Packages, 
temporary financial support to businesses, to help them and is seen as a means of achieving economic reform, improving 
overcome the crisis in the absence of formal unemployment education and taxation, controlling expenditure and creating an 
insurance. Sint Maarten has only limited social assistance and efficient public sector. Personal data protection legislation 
anti-poverty measures in place to cushion the impact of applicable to all countries in the Kingdom is currently being 
unemployment and reduced incomes on low-income households. drafted and is an important precondition for further digitalisation. 
People who suffered a loss of income or whose earnings were 
below minimum wage received direct food support through a Stakeholders also see digitalisation as key to achieving Curaçao’s 
programme for all the islands, financed by the Netherlands. development priorities. According to a 2021 UNDP digital 
readiness assessment, Curaçao has a good starting position for 
The government of Sint Maarten developed the National Vision further digitalisation. The Smart Nation Curaçao Platform is 
through an inclusive approach in the form of national dialogues, tasked with implementing, in phases, a long-term vision and 
with the aim of improving quality of life for all. Sint Maarten is integral strategic plan aimed at making Willemstad a Smart City 
strongly committed to reducing inequalities by ‘reaching those and Curaçao a Smart Nation. The Smart Nation movement is 
farthest behind first’, in line with the pledge of the 2030 Agenda fast becoming an integral part of the country’s strategy to 
to leave no one behind. The National Vision for the sustainable achieve sustainable development across multiple areas and 
development of Sint Maarten supports an integrated approach to improve overall efficiency and quality of life.
the SDGs. For instance, it proposes the development of universal, 
affordable national health insurance (SDG 3), a fairer distribution Like Curaçao, Sint Maarten is actively working to digitalise 
of wealth through tax reform (SDG 1), economic diversification to certain public services in order to enhance accessibility and 
create more jobs (SDG 8), the development of a social security efficiency for both civil servants and members of the public. 
system (SDG 1) and a review of Sint Maarten’s education system Currently, several high-demand services are already available 
with a view to improving its quality (SDG 4) and relevance to online, and online payment is possible too. Other public offices 
current and future labour market trends (SDG 9). will start offering services digitally in the near future. This will 
support effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda. The Sint 
To address these challenges in a structural manner, the countries Maarten Digital Government Transformation Project is currently 
have invested in various initiatives, including education and being implemented with support from the World Bank and aims 
lifelong learning. The Country Packages support these efforts. to enhance the delivery of and access to public services for 
Digital literacy and digitalisation are important instruments in private individuals and businesses, and make the digital 
building capacity and resilience. infrastructure and government systems more resilient. The 
project is guided by whole-of-government frameworks and 
policies relating to enterprise architecture, cybersecurity, and 
2.5 Digitalisation of public services data sharing and privacy. The project has three main components: 
Small island states cannot take advantage of economies of scale (1) strengthen the policy and institutional environment, (2) build 
and their limited financial resources require creative solutions. digital platforms to enable service delivery, and (3) improve 
Within these constraints, digitalisation offers important user-centred public services.
opportunities for strengthening economic resilience and 
transparency, which also supports disaster preparedness. Aruba adopted an innovation and digital transformation strategy 
However, digitalisation is a paradox: it can make public services in 2018, which includes an eGovernment programme. Significant 
more inclusive and affordable and enable economic growth and progress has been made, notably the activation of the 
diversification, yet digitalisation is also expensive and digital eGovernment Road Map 2020-2025, improved interoperability 
inclusion is a concern. The use of off-the-shelf software is not between government departments through the UXP platform, 
always possible, due to specific rules and regulations. Tax filing the launch of the National Digital Agenda and the Digital ID 
software, for instance, must be tailored to national tax systems. strategy. In 2022 the focus will be on this last strategy, which will 

21 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
resilience, strengthen equality of opportunity and the capacities Like most young developing countries, Curaçao, Aruba and Sint 
of the population, and invest in climate adaptation, disaster risk Maarten are still finding their place in the international playing 
reduction and disaster preparedness. Sustainable tourism field and are still strengthening their public bodies in order to 
presents economically resilient opportunities and economic become stable, democratic nations with a strong identity and 
diversification can be achieved through digitalisation, for economy. Currently the three countries do not have sufficient 
example. To this end, the islands can enter into partnerships resources and public funds to respond to the impacts of a crisis, 
with each other, but certainly also with other countries. nor to invest sufficiently in the implementation of the SDGs. 
Partnerships for the goals and external development financing 
Inclusive digital development is crucial to both use and benefit are required to ensure full recovery from external shocks like the 
from the opportunities arising from digitalisation, but will require pandemic, to build back better after the crisis, and ultimately 
additional efforts in the form of investment in education and achieve resilience and sustainability. International, regional and 
lifelong learning. Governments do not have to do this alone; national cooperation therefore focuses on finance, technology 
the islands’ business communities can also play a role. By far the and capacity building, as well as policy coherence and 
most urgent problem is the need to invest in climate adaptation institutional strengthening. Access to external development 
and disaster preparedness in a manner that includes the entire financing for the three Caribbean countries is limited, however, 
population. To be able to make the necessary changes, access due to the way the Kingdom is structured.
to finance will remain imperative. 
The bonds within the Kingdom, both between the four countries 
As the challenges and vulnerabilities are strongly interlinked, so and between the Netherlands in the Caribbean (Bonaire, St 
the solutions must be crosscutting. This is in line with the 2030 Eustatius and Saba) and the Netherlands in Europe are 
Agenda with its interconnected SDGs, based on the idea that longstanding. Yet, as the present Kingdom structure only dates 
sustainable development requires an integrated approach. back to 2010, relations are still developing and will require 
Policies and government investment need to focus on solutions special attention in the coming years. In this process the 
for the long term, and include investment in governance and inhabitants of the islands and their interests, as reflected in the 
institutional capacities. SDGs, should take centre stage. 

23 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
A growing movement importance of involving the creative industries in addressing 
Society at large has been strongly committed to the SDGs from these challenges. Interest in sustainability in the cultural and 
the outset. Since the previous VNR was presented in 2017, creative sectors is also growing year on year. SDG activities are 
support for the SDGs has grown and taken firm root. It began increasingly associated with artistic and cultural projects, and 
with a relatively small group of parties that were involved in the the SDGs are more and more often used as guiding principles in 
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda, but now the cultural sector, with a strong focus on diversity and inclusion, 
the goals are evident in many areas of life. Dutch companies driven by the government and by the creative sectors 
and civil society organisations set up the SDG Charter Network themselves. The involvement of society at large is vital when 
as early as 2013, which later became the platform organisation building a culture of peace, global citizenship and sustainable 
SDG Nederland. The SDG movement is large and growing, and development, which are preconditions for the necessary societal 
is full of energy and innovative ideas. It has more than 1,200 changes (SDG 4.7). Education is instrumental in this. The 
member organisations, including many sector and umbrella Netherlands is therefore updating the primary and secondary 
organisations. Many more organisations are using the SDGs as education curriculum to include sustainability and citizenship. 
a compass, including multinationals, SMEs, family businesses 
and social enterprises. Knowledge and educational institutions 
use the SDGs in teaching, in research and in fieldwork, and as Flag campaign
operational management guidelines. For example, every year, 
secondary vocational schools and higher education institutions On 25 September, SDG Action Day, local and provincial 
(HBOs and universities) compete for the SustainaBUL Award, authorities, businesses, higher education institutions, NGOs, 
presented to the most sustainable educational institutions in the ministries, Dutch embassies worldwide and other 
Netherlands. Research into the goals is also on the rise, focusing organisations raise the SDG flag and share the flag-raising 
on both the Dutch and the global situation. The SDGs have events on social media using the hashtag #togetherfortheSDGs. 
clearly been widely embraced across all sections of society. This successful initiative of the Association of Netherlands 
Municipalities (VNG), UN Global Compact Network 
Netherlands, SDG Nederland and central government 
attracted more than 800 participating organisations in 2021.
The unifying force of the SDGs has resulted in closer cooperation 
between organisations, helped by SDG Alliances (‘SDG-
Allianties’) which are affiliated with SDG Nederland. Each 
Alliance brings together organisations with different members 
and areas of expertise to focus on specific SDGs, and together 
the Alliances ensure synergies. Certain goals are interdependent 
and can only truly be achieved by pooling efforts. For instance, 
the Alliances focused on the ‘social’ goals (SDGs 1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10 
and 16) are working towards a common agenda on inclusion 
and equal opportunities. Another example is the network of 
‘SDG Houses’ that has been set up. Initiated by the first SDG 
Young ‘SDG Voices’ talking with local SDG ambassador in Delft during House, the Royal Tropical Institute in Amsterdam, it now links 
SDG Action Day on 25 September 2021 SDG Houses in many iconic locations across the country that 
provide space to learn about and work on the SDGs. Society at 
Culture and creativity play a key role in raising awareness of large is also increasingly seeking synergies between the goals, 
societal challenges and creating the right conditions for societal as demonstrated by the Fair Climate Agenda (‘Eerlijke 
transitions. The new coalition agreement acknowledges the Klimaatagenda’, in Dutch) drawn up by a coalition of 

25 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
title of Global Goals Municipality (as of May 2022). The value of MKB-Nederland in their new strategy ‘Agenda NL 2030: Doing 
the SDGs for local policy is underscored by the Association of Business to Create Broad Welfare’ (2021). One of the ways they 
Netherlands Municipalities (VNG). It urged local politicians to do this is by using the SDGs as guiding principles in their value 
use the SDGs in their new coalition agreements, negotiated after chains. The Global Compact Network Netherlands aims to scale 
the local elections in March 2022. The energy that subnational up private-sector impact and speed up achievement of the SDG 
authorities are investing in the SDGs is reflected in the Voluntary agenda. To this end, it offers participating companies the SDG 
Subnational Review (VSR) conducted by the VNG, the Dutch Ambition Accelerator.
Water Authorities and the Association of Provincial Authorities 
(IPO). Amsterdam City Council will draft a local version of the Despite the evident enthusiasm, much remains to be done. The 
voluntary SDG report (Voluntary Local Review) this year. umbrella organisation of social and impact-driven enterprises, 
MVO Nederland, launched a New Economy Index (NEx) in 2020 
to measure where we are in the transition towards a sustainable, 
inclusive economy. In 2022 the index is at 15.4%, but MVO 
Nederland believes this is not enough to reach the tipping point 
6
within the specified time. A survey conducted by VNO-NCW 
and UN Global Compact Netherlands has shown that the 
coronavirus pandemic has not had any adverse effect on the 
SDG efforts of many businesses, and 66% of the respondents 
even said that they wished to do more to achieve the SDGs in 
the years ahead. The pandemic has, however, increased the risk 
of a widening gap between large companies – which have 
continued to work on sustainability – and smaller companies, 
which have not been able to do as much because of the 
economic crisis. Recovery measures that use the SDGs as a 
Hoisting of the SDG-flag in the city of Den Bosch on SDG Action Day 25 guiding compass can help businesses press ahead with their 
Sept. 2021 sustainability agenda. That was the message of the Green 
Recovery Statement submitted to the government in June 2020 
The role of the private sector by the eight multinationals in the Dutch Sustainable Growth 
Businesses recognise that they can make a positive contribution Coalition, together with 250 other companies. 
to a future-proof economy and resilient society. The main 
business networks have joined the SDG movement in order to In the financial sector, interest in two types of investment is 
share information about implementing, monitoring and growing: sustainable investment, partly due to the EU Taxonomy 
reporting on the SDGs. Responsible business conduct (RBC) is Regulation, and impact investment. Various parties are 
increasingly the norm. In 2019, at the government’s request, the developing expertise and standards to facilitate this. The SDG 
Social and Economic Council of the Netherlands (SER) issued an Impact Assessment Working Group of De Nederlandsche Bank 
advisory report on how the OECD Guidelines for Multinational (DNB, the Dutch central bank) has drafted guidance for investors 
Enterprises can reinforce the SDGs, and vice versa. It on measuring the impact of their investments on the SDGs. The 
recommends that companies take the OECD Guidelines as a 
starting point for their policy on RBC, and enhance their own 
6 The NEx was developed by MVO Nederland to measure the 
positive impact using the SDGs. 
sustainability of the private sector. The target is to reach 20% by 2025, 
and eventually 100%. When it was launched in 2020, the index was at 
12.1%. It is based on the average score on seven themes: new wealth 
Businesses wish to contribute to prosperity in the Netherlands, 
(the pursuit of positive social impact on a par with ﬁnancial growth), real 
according to the employers’ associations VNO-NCW 
prices, transparent value chains, inclusive business, green energy, 
(Confederation of Netherlands Industry and Employers) and biodiversity and circular economy. 

27 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
covered in the RIA, in particular, the effects on developing CBS has also been publishing the Regional Monitor of Wellbeing 
countries and gender equality. Assessing the future effects of since 2020, documenting wellbeing in municipalities, provinces 
government policy in the Netherlands and elsewhere on and COROP regions (NUTS 3). Using 42 indicators, the Monitor 
different SDG’s will result in more coherent and more effective provides a broad, diverse picture of the current situation and 
policy. The quality and timing of the assessment is important, the development of wellbeing in the Netherlands at regional 
however, and this is neither adequate nor transparent enough level. The Caribbean Netherlands will also be included as from 
at the moment. Ways of enhancing the implementation of 2022. However, because of the small scale of the islands and 
the SDG assessment are being investigated in the context of low implementation capacity, data is available for only a limited 
the revision of the Regulatory Impact Assessment. number of indicators; 72 indicators on 16 policy themes will 
therefore be monitored.
Data collection
There has also been progress with data collection since the What is the Netherlands’ position according to 
previous VNR in 2017. Statistics Netherlands (CBS) carried out a the figures?
baseline survey in 2016 based on the UN indicators, with data The figures included in the VNR come from the 2021 Monitor of 
available for around a third of these. Data is now available for Wellbeing & the SDGs, the latest measurement available when 
half of the official UN indicators (71% if the indicators already this report was written. We see high scores, in particular, for 
achieved are included), and there are good alternative indicators SDG 4 (education), SDG 5 (gender equality), SDG 9 (sustainable 
for a further 13%. Each year, at the government’s request, CBS industrialisation component), SDG 11 (living environment 
further refines the indicators, which helps clarify the progress component) and SDG 17 (partnerships). At least half of the 
made and the challenges remaining. Since 2019, at parliament’s indicators for these SDGs show a positive trend. For SDGs 2, 6 
request, the annual SDG assessment and the Monitor of and 8, we see many positive trends and few negative trends. 
Wellbeing have been incorporated into one publication. The The goals on which the Netherlands does not score well are 
indicators of both frameworks overlap and complement each SDG 15 (life on land), SDG 11 (housing component) and SDG 9 
other. The SDGs make it possible to quantify wellbeing and (infrastructure and transport components). Notably, the trends 
provide more detailed insight into certain aspects of it. for SDGs 7 and 13 have been largely positive for the past few 
Conversely, the focus of the wellbeing measurement is on the years, partly due to an increased share of renewable energy in 
‘here and now’, ‘later’ and ‘elsewhere’, which helps us the energy mix, a downward trend in the total energy 
understand the consequences of our current wellbeing for consumption of the economy and lower carbon emissions from 
future generations and for people elsewhere in the world, thus domestic traffic and transport. The same goes for SDG 5. This 
clarifying underlying principles of the SDG agenda, such as does not mean that we have achieved these goals. Much 
‘Leave No One Behind’ and future-readiness. remains to be done on each of them. For SDG 5 (gender 
equality), for instance, there is still a noticeable difference 
CBS publishes the Monitor of Wellbeing & the SDGs as input for between the economic independence of women (63.8%) and 
the annual accountability debate between the government and men (81.1%), although the figure for both is rising; the male/
parliament. The measurement of the Netherlands’ SDG female pay differential is still significant, but has fallen to 13.7%. 
performance is also presented in the annual SDSN/Bertelsmann With regard to SDG 1 (no poverty), the Netherlands ranks first in 
Sustainable Development Report and the SDSN/IEEP Europe Europe and will be able to achieve this goal by 2030. Another 
Sustainable Development Report, as well as the OECD favourable development is the declining proportion of children 
Measuring Distance to the SDG Targets reports. In March 2021 living below the low-income threshold. The number of 
the NGO coalition SDG Spotlight Nederland published a households living below the poverty line for more than four 
shadow report that critically assessed Dutch policy aimed at years has also fallen slightly (3.1% in 2020), but the number of 
SDGs 10 and 15. Transparency International NL compiled a homeless people has risen in recent years. 
shadow report on SDG 16 in 2020. 

29 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
3.3 Progress on the SDGs reviewed challenge to the Netherlands. More generally, erosion of natural 
on the basis of six entry points capital is endangering future prosperity. Insufficient data was 
To prepare for the VNR, six SDG dialogues were organised for available for SDG 14, but CBS warns of a deterioration in 
the purpose of obtaining input from stakeholders, including biodiversity. In the area of health and nutrition, the rise in obesity 
representatives from all tiers of government, civil society is cause for concern.
organisations, the private sector, young people, educational 
institutions and the research community. As part of this exercise, In the Netherlands, no one needs to go hungry and there is a 
the Netherlands’ implementation of the SDGs was viewed wide choice of relatively cheap foodstuffs (SDG 2). The downside 
through the lens of six systemic challenges (‘entry points’). of this is that the emphasis on high production at low cost has 
placed tremendous pressure on biodiversity and the 
The SDGs concern the economy, society, wellbeing, human environment, particularly given the Netherlands’ small surface 
rights, security and participation. Both the strength and the area. The Netherlands therefore lags behind the rest of Europe 
challenge of the agenda lie in the interlinkages between the in terms of biodiversity values and trends, both in water and on 
goals. While the importance of a comprehensive approach is land (SDGs 14 and 15). It is generally acknowledged that the 
universally acknowledged, it is not easy to put this into practice. agricultural production system in its present form (worldwide 
The UN Global Sustainable Development Report (2019) and in the Netherlands) will be untenable in the future. Our 
recommends focusing on a number of systemic challenges, planet can no longer sustain the burden of current production 
defined as entry points, which encompass several SDGs and methods and consumer behaviour. This has led to an ambitious 
largely correspond to the Netherlands’ current priorities. The policy to promote circular agriculture. This also encompasses 
stakeholder dialogues therefore covered six overarching entry sustainable management of agricultural soils and sustainable 
points for the Netherlands, addressing the most relevant SDGs crop protection, reducing leaching of nitrates and other harmful 
in relation to each other. This made it possible to consult a large substances from farmland, and a new forestry strategy. Nutrition 
number of stakeholders and consider different viewpoints, policy is aimed at prevention, healthy choices and a healthy 
resulting in critical, open and constructive dialogues. The many food environment, for example with the National Prevention 
useful insights gained – and seeing things from each other’s Agreement and public awareness instruments such as the five 
perspective – provide a sound basis for the years ahead. The food groups and Nutri-score product labels. While policy aimed 
following summaries of these dialogues also include at making the agri-food system more sustainable is lauded as a 
stakeholders’ viewpoints. success, its implementation is challenging. On the other hand, 
there have been some positive results in the area of nature 
Entry point 1: Circular agriculture, biodiversity and development. To achieve the European nature restoration 
the food system  goals, natural areas will need to be substantially expanded and 
The transition to circular agriculture (SDG 2) in the Netherlands nature conservation must strive to ensure that the natural 
is closely linked to the protection and restoration of nature and environment throughout the country meets basic quality criteria. 
biodiversity (SDGs 14 and 15) and ensuring a sustainable and 
healthy food system for all (SDGs 2, 3 and 12). According to SDG 14 warrants special attention. There is little information 
Statistics Netherlands (CBS), the Netherlands scores well on about this goal in the statistics, but steps have been taken in 
SDG 2, with good access to nutrition and high agricultural recent years to introduce a more integrated policy. For instance, 
productivity. In terms of sustainability, CBS finds that the area the North Sea Agreement (2021) includes agreements between 
under organic production has increased, but is still small the Dutch government and stakeholders on striking a better 
compared with other European countries. Food waste and balance between the various activities taking place in the North 
antibiotics use in agriculture are falling. The main challenge is Sea up to 2030 and beyond. Making the seafood industry more 
excess nitrogen deposition in the environment, which is also sustainable is one of the priorities of European fisheries policy.
high compared with the rest of Europe. This leads directly to the 
poor score for SDG 15, the achievement of which poses a major 

31 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
challenges in the areas of suitable, affordable housing and Challenges and opportunities 
climate adaptation. The vast majority of people are happy with Prevention is at the heart of policy, but to be able to direct 
their housing and where they live. The physical environment is efforts effectively, it must be defined more clearly, with tangible 
under threat, however, which also affects the wellbeing of goals. It is also important to determine where responsibility lies 
individuals. Environmental pollution may be decreasing, but it for investing in prevention in different sectors. Policy is placing 
still causes illness and premature death. greater emphasis on healthy lifestyles, but legislation and 
financial incentives do not yet reflect this: the healthcare sector 
Prevention, healthy lifestyles and a healthy living environment earns more by treating sick people than by preventing illness in 
are increasingly addressed in policy, such as in the Environment healthy people, and health insurers are less inclined to reimburse 
and Planning Act and in the new National Environmental preventive care. This could change if positive health outcomes 
Programme that is being developed. Coherence between the were the guiding principle. Reducing health inequalities 
different goals is also embedded in policy. In healthcare, much between different groups also calls for a targeted approach. 
has been done to provide the right care, in the right place. 
There is more recognition of the importance of mental health, Young people’s mental health burden is growing as a result of 
although taboos still exist. There have been concerted efforts to pressure to achieve and uncertain future prospects. Providing 
ensure that people can pursue lifelong personal development, early interventions in their own setting and giving them space 
with measures designed to support employees in planning and for taking things a bit easier from time to time could prevent a 
managing their development, to encourage employers and the great deal of distress. Education is strongly focused on cognitive 
social partners to provide more flexible forms of training and learning and not so much on providing an ‘outlet’. Music 
education for adults, and to promote a learning culture. The lessons, swimming lessons, sport and homework supervision at 
literacy programme ‘Tel mee met Taal’  (2020-2024) tackles all primary and secondary schools can help pupils develop 
functional illiteracy and provides funding for training basic skills coping skills. The mental healthcare sector is still beset with 
on the work floor. There are also challenges, however, particularly many organisational difficulties, especially long waiting lists and 
when it comes to implementing policy. In theory, delegating providing patients with the treatment that is most suitable in 
social support and care for young people and vulnerable groups their specific situation. 
to municipalities could result in more tailored services. In 
practice, this has not yet been achieved. There has been a Suitable employment is a key factor in wellbeing, but for 
decline in mental health services in recent years, while demand vulnerable young people and adults it is a challenge finding work. 
has risen. One positive trend is that young people and other Opportunities for ongoing personal development, reskilling and 
target groups are more involved in health policy and there is upskilling reduce unemployment and promote everyone’s 
greater scope for citizens’ initiatives. There are also more wellbeing, but people in these groups benefit especially. An 
physical activity programmes for young people and vulnerable appropriate education system that welcomes diversity and 
groups. A good example is the Life Goals Foundation, an inclusion promotes this and may also reduce the dropout rate. 
organisation that helps vulnerable people, such as the homeless, Cooperation between all relevant stakeholders is crucial. One 
teenage mothers and addicts, to get their lives back on track success story here is the partnership between municipalities, 
through sport. In September 2021 the organisation hosted the employers, schools and trade unions in the Noord-Holland Noord 
European Life Goals Games in Utrecht as part of the European region to achieve a strong and inclusive labour market. 
Week of Sport. Teams from across Europe attended the 
tournament in a celebration of their resilience. Participation in Easy access to a clean, healthy and green living environment 
cultural activities and creativity also has positive effects, as with space to exercise and meet people has major benefits for 
demonstrated for example in local experiments with ‘Kunst op physical and mental wellbeing. Biodiversity and climate 
recept’, an arts-centred initiative for people with recurrent measures reinforce each other and contribute to better health. 
psychosocial problems. Urban green space also enhances resilience to climate change 
and helps reduce air pollution. By creating more cycle paths and 

33 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
towards circularity goals, a matter on which the Netherlands taught in professional and vocational education. However, 
10
Environmental Assessment Agency published a report in 2021. upskilling strategies for workers, people returning to 
Lastly, the Netherlands promotes international cooperation in employment and newcomers are also needed, as are 
order to advance the circular economy, for example by partnerships between educational institutions and companies at 
supporting the OECD in developing metrics, indicators and local and regional level. In the interests of ensuring equal 
new business models and identifying trade-offs. opportunities, it is important to start teaching children about 
the circular economy in primary school, which also calls for a 
Circular activities are often still limited to recycling and focus joint approach from government, the business sector and 
too little on retaining material value, for example by ‘upcycling’. education. An inclusive circular transition means ensuring that 
The R ladder describes different circularity strategies, with everyone can participate and taking steps, including fiscal 
Refuse, Rethink, Reduce, Reuse and Repair at the top, and measures, to prevent sustainable consumption being more 
Recycle and Recover at the bottom. The aim is to operate as expensive. There are also potential opportunities in circular 
high up the ladder as possible. Often, the focus is on technical models, e.g. switching from buying goods to leasing them. 
solutions, such as reducing material inputs per unit of product. 
Yet the circular transition also involves process changes Investments in the circular economy, climate, biodiversity and 
(operational management and production process) and sustainable water management (SDGs 6, 12, 13 and 15) can 
important behavioural aspects. have multiplier effects, but an integrated approach to several 
transitions without negatively affecting other transitions is not 
Change at the beginning of the chain is needed, for example by yet the norm. Moreover, whereas in the case of climate policy, 
introducing packaging legislation and incentives for sustainable international carbon accounting rules disregard savings in 
consumption. For both the circular and the energy transition, indirect carbon, circularity, by definition, requires the entire 
there should be clear rules on reparability and service life. value chain to be considered. We therefore need to improve our 
Ensuring that government instruments consistently promote understanding of how different transition strategies influence 
circularity will also be a challenge. Initiatives to market raw each other, including possible trade-offs between them. The 
materials recovered from waste water, for example, meet with feedback loop between monitoring and implementation 
legal and pricing barriers. Public authorities can also play an management must also be improved. It is not enough for 
important part through procurement and tendering: circular producers to focus on their own business operations; the direct 
procurement is a policy ambition, but not an obligation. and indirect effects in the whole chain from raw materials 
Circularity as one of the contract award criteria can become through to end user should also be taken into account in the 
more embedded if public authorities look more closely at the goals and measuring systems. 
total cost of ownership, which also includes social value and 
additional costs over the entire period of use. A key tool for Entry point 4: A fair climate and energy transition, 
accelerating the transition is to tighten up criteria, definitions climate adaptation and water
and measuring systems, and many parties around the world are In the past six years, the Netherlands has invested a great deal 
already working on this. of effort in SDG 13 and in implementing the Paris Agreement. 
The ongoing climate and energy transition (SDGs 13 and 7) 
It is important that a transition take into account all sections of focuses on switching to a sustainable energy supply and a 
the population and businesses, not least to gain broad support. carbon-neutral economy. In addition, the government combines 
Having the right knowledge and skills is another challenge, climate adaptation efforts with sustainable water management 
certainly for some small and medium-sized companies. One (SDG 6), sustainable economic growth and decent work (SDG 
success is the increased number of relevant courses and subjects 8), the circular economy (SDG 12), nature and biodiversity (SDG 
15), and conservation and sustainable use of oceans and seas 
(SDG 14). Reducing inequality (SDG 10) is crucial to ensure a fair 
10 PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, Netherlands 
transition in which everyone can participate.
Integral Circular Economy Report 2021.

35 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
have been stepped up. Central government and the provincial pricing and setting standards, as this would go a long way 
and water authorities are working together to secure an towards changing the behaviour of businesses and members of 
adequate supply of fresh water even in dry years. Flood the public. They also feel the ‘polluter pays’ principle could be 
prevention is traditionally well organised in the Netherlands; the applied more strictly to taxation, thus contributing to the climate 
flipside of this success is that members of the public are not very transition. It is essential to increase support for climate measures, 
aware of water-related risks. The government has invested in for instance by clearly communicating the gravity of the 
nature-based solutions in recent years, such as the Room for the situation. Education has a key role to play, too. It is equally 
River programme. The Delta Plan on Spatial Adaptation is a important for companies to be transparent about and 
good example of a long-term programme with a broad and accountable for their actions. 
inclusive approach. The establishment of the Global Center on 
Adaptation underscores the Netherlands’ ambition to work with The risks facing the Dutch soil and water ecosystem are diverse 
international partners and share knowledge on this topic. and increasing. More and more often, short-term and long-term 
interests conflict, such as  choosing whether to reinforce dikes 
The use of the North Sea brings other challenges. A great deal to address immediate threats or create space for water in order 
of space is needed for offshore wind turbines, but Dutch policy to serve longer term goals. In the long term, land with a higher 
on the North Sea also pursues other objectives, such as reducing risk of flooding must only be used in a way that is appropriate. 
pollution, restoring biodiversity and making fisheries sustainable. At the moment, however, due to the housing shortage there is 
These can be addressed in a coherent approach, as a risk of homes being built in areas that may prove to be unfit for 
demonstrated by The Rich North Sea programme (‘De Rijke this in the longer term. Taking climate adaptation into 
Noordzee’), which combines the building of new wind farms consideration in decision-making processes helps avoid these 
with biodiversity restoration of the seabed in wind farm zones. It kinds of lock-ins and encourages climate-robust land use.
is acknowledged that more needs to be done, however. A long-
term national strategy with good indicators is required in order The erosion of certainties demands a different way of thinking 
to protect vital marine ecosystems. and designing. Accepting that not everything can be engineered 
can increase mental resilience. Municipalities are already 
Water quality (SDG 6) in the Netherlands is improving, but it will working on risk dialogues and agendas for climate adaptation, 
be a tough task to meet the requirements of the EU Water but more action will be needed longer term. Resistance to 
Framework Directive (WFD). The recent river basin management change is understandable and concerns should be heard, but at 
plans under this Directive will help make real progress towards the same time it can stand in the way of promising solutions. 
better water quality in the years ahead. The government is also Decision-making can be improved in various ways to deal with 
working to achieve a transition in agriculture, giving priority not this, e.g. by increasing transparency about trade-offs, 
only to the problem of nitrogen pollution but also to the WFD compensating directly injured parties, being honest about the 
goals, biodiversity and climate change. urgency of the situation and combining all this with a positive 
vision of the future, where the benefits for all concerned are 
Challenges and opportunities made clear.
Considerable progress has been made launching the climate 
and energy transition, but it is a huge task and efforts will have If climate neutrality is to be achieved, clearer standards are 
to be significantly stepped up over the next few years. required. Civil society stakeholders point out that steps must be 
Stakeholders want to see a correlation between the activities taken to prevent businesses focusing on carbon offsetting 
undertaken in different sectors, more central coordination and instead of reducing their own carbon emissions, as this does not 
initiatives to promote creativity. Deploying various government help us achieve the Paris Agreement goals. To prevent 
instruments consistently and coherently to achieve the climate greenwashing, the government could set standards defining 
goals also continues to be a challenge. A number of stakeholders ‘net zero’ and other claims, so that frontrunners are not 
encourage the government to do more in terms of carbon disadvantaged. Another challenge is to increase global 

37 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
highlighted this only too clearly and undermined confidence in more accessible on every level to people with disabilities (in 
the government. Action is needed on many fronts to combat particular, through the Jobs and Jobs Quota (Work Disabled 
social exclusion. Inequality of opportunity is a multi-layered Persons) Act and the Participation Act). Another positive 
problem because the people affected are vulnerable in many development is that vulnerable groups, including LGBTI people, 
areas, including health, education, housing, employment and are more confident about being themselves. In addition, greater 
social security, and in the media and the political arena. priority is being given to enhancing socioeconomic security. This 
is reflected in the greater scope for municipalities to adapt social 
Education is a crucial factor determining the opportunities that assistance to individual needs, in the stronger focus of housing 
people have. Research has shown that inequality of opportunity policy on people on low incomes, and in the intended 
in education has increased significantly since 2009, but targeted introduction of a basic grant in the student finance scheme. The 
policy efforts have now halted this trend. The quality of Balanced Labour Market Act improves the legal status and 
education is often lower in deprived neighbourhoods, with a employment conditions of payroll employees, and gives standby 
less varied range of facilities available. Policy has been put in workers more security as regards work and income.
place specifically to improve educational equity, for which a 
collaborative effort by all relevant stakeholders is essential. This 
collaboration is taking place within the Equal Opportunities Equal Opportunities Alliance
Alliance, an initiative of the Ministry of Education, Culture and 
Science. The Netherlands also has challenges in terms of gender Promoting equality of opportunity is a complex issue and 
equality. Although most statistical indicators are showing hence a broad societal challenge. In addition to taking policy 
improvement in recent years, due to the growing employment measures designed to improve equal opportunities, the 
rate among women and the narrowing gender pay gap, there is Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and Science therefore 
still a disparity between women and men when it comes to launched the Equal Opportunities Alliance (‘Gelijke Kansen 
employment rate, wages, economic and financial independence, Alliantie’, GKA) in 2016, in which it works with schools, civil 
and the ratio of women in executive posts. Equal opportunities society organisations and more than a hundred municipalities 
policy focuses on equality in the labour market, social safety, to promote equality of opportunity in education. The ministry 
equal treatment and gender diversity. provides knowledge, data, research and financial resources 
through the GKA to existing or new local initiatives aimed at 
There have been successes in the past few years, such as the fact improving the three main social environments of children and 
that government policy now recognises that equity requires an young people: school, home and the community. Individuals 
unequal approach. The recent appointment of a National and organisations within the networks are able to tackle their 
Coordinator against Discrimination and Racism and a Minister own local challenges and thus contribute to equal 
for Poverty Policy illustrates this point and will help the opportunities. This network approach enables the GKA to 
Netherlands address the challenges in the years ahead. Bills gather information about what works and why, so that 
have been introduced to combat discrimination and sexual effective interventions can be scaled up. And so that a given 
offences. The mandatory quota of women on boards of directors teacher at a given school in a given area can make a difference 
that was adopted in 2021 will have a positive effect on the to a given pupil.
number of women in leadership positions; central government 
has committed to appointing at least 45% of senior civil service Challenges and opportunities
jobs to women. Greater participation by young people and other Efforts to tackle inequality of opportunity are gaining significant 
target groups in decision-making has many positive effects, momentum. The challenge in the years ahead will be to achieve 
while the Open Government Act is improving transparency of change in the field. A key requirement in this regard is to make 
and accessibility to public administration. The ratification of the it easier for public bodies to take the human dimension into 
UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities has account where necessary. A number of issues demand special 
been translated into robust policy that aims to make society attention and, at the same time, present opportunities.

39 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
high on the agenda. At the same time, we have to acknowledge Successive governments have focused on a coherent approach 
that our negative environmental footprint abroad is large. As a to development cooperation and trade. Private-sector 
result of our raw material- and energy-intensive economy and involvement can be a driver for sustainable economic and social 
our consumption patterns, we are putting considerable pressure development. The Policy and Operations Evaluation Department 
on natural resources and land use beyond our borders. A (IOB) of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs recently investigated the 
number of stakeholders criticise Dutch tax policy. Initiatives to effectiveness of such involvement; the resulting report and the 
make the Dutch economy more sustainable and enhance RBC government’s response to it were subsequently submitted to 
11
will help reduce this footprint. There is an action plan on policy the House of Representatives. Cooperation with foreign trade 
coherence with specific measures to further reduce spillover and development cooperation partner countries focuses, 
effects, which will help us meet SDGs 17, 12, 10 and 2, both at among other things, on providing support to address the 
home and abroad. Strengthening multilateral cooperation in climate-food-water nexus, promote gender equality and 
tackling major global challenges is important for all 17 SDGs. women’s rights, and give the most vulnerable groups and young 
people a stronger voice (see also 3.5). Building partnerships 
According to Statistics Netherlands (CBS), the Netherlands with NGOs and businesses plays an important role here. One 
scores average to good on SDG 17, although only a limited way of promoting sustainable, responsible trade and investment 
number of the targets are measured. We are also one of the few is by encouraging Dutch firms to direct their activities towards 
countries in the world to measure the effect of our prosperity on achieving the SDGs. They are also expected to operate 
other nations’ prosperity. CBS does so by examining income according to the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
flows (trade and aid) and the use that the Netherlands makes of Rights and the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises. 
other countries’ natural capital (the environment and resources), The new coalition agreement states that the Netherlands will 
paying particular attention to the impact on least developed continue to advocate EU legislation on RBC, and will introduce 
countries (LDCs), as recommended in the 1987 Brundtland national legislation that takes account of a level playing field 
Report. Trade and aid show a stable to positive trend. The with neighbouring countries and the implementation of possible 
volume of trade with LDCs is relatively high, with imports from EU legislation. The European Commission published an RBC 
Asia and the Latin American and Caribbean region rising and legislative proposal on 23 February 2022. The Dutch policy mix 
those from Africa maintaining a stable level. The trend in ODA will be supplemented with measures to promote compliance 
is steady: in 2020 the Netherlands spent 0.59% of its GNI with legislation and the application of due diligence, i.e. 
(€4.5bn) on assistance, earning it fifth place in the European including conditions on RBC in contract awards and grant 
rankings. Transfers have risen and are relatively high compared awards for businesses, a new RBC support office, financial 
with other European countries. The picture regarding raw incentives and sectoral cooperation. 
materials and environmental footprint (SDG 12) is mixed. The 
Netherlands’ carbon footprint (SDG 13) – the total greenhouse At EU level, the Netherlands is also aiming for development-
gas emissions caused by Dutch consumption – fell by 8.2% in friendly trade agreements and a development-friendly 
2020 compared with 2019. There was a significant decline in investment regime, of which policy discretion is an important 
imports of fossil fuel from LDCs, and in those of non-metallic aspect. Under the auspices of the OECD, the Netherlands helps 
minerals, which reduced our environmental footprint. Total develop indicators to measure the SDG quality of direct foreign 
imports of fossil energy sources increased, however. The investments.
Netherlands imported more biomass, which puts pressure on 
the natural resources of countries in other parts of the world. In To enhance the Netherlands’ positive impact on and reduce our 
both the global SDSN/Bertelsmann ranking and its European footprint in other countries, policy coherence for sustainable 
equivalent, the Netherlands scores poorly on spillover effects, development is crucial. The action plan on policy coherence 
coming 159th out of 165 countries and 31st out of 31 countries, focuses on five areas where the Netherlands can make a 
respectively.
11  Parliamentary Paper 2022Z05526.

41 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
involved when companies perform due diligence in the interests Poverty reduction and safety 
of better protecting local livelihoods, boosting ecological In 2019, to underscore its commitment to improving the 
resilience and stimulating local economies. With this in mind, livelihoods of the inhabitants of the Caribbean Netherlands, the 
the Netherlands is investing in, for example, grassroots previous government set a benchmark for a minimum income 
organisations in developing countries (see also 3.5). standard. The aim is to lower the cost of living and raise incomes 
so that everyone living there can provide for themselves. 
There are lessons to be learned from the COVID pandemic about 
the challenges of taking a coherent approach to global public The current government’s main goal for the Caribbean 
goods, in this case health. Three key ways in which the Netherlands Netherlands is to improve the standard of living and reduce 
contributes to global public goods are by assessing the impact of poverty. During its term in office, the government will work 
domestic policy and financial flows on other countries (policy towards the minimum income standard benchmark, taking a 
coherence), undertaking development cooperation, and step-by-step approach jointly with the islands’ public bodies to 
strengthening global governance through multilateral channels. enable them to carry out their tasks more effectively. Raising the 
This last point is essential in a global crisis, as the effectiveness of statutory minimum wage (and the benefits linked to it) and 
international cooperation also affects outcomes in the lowering the cost of living is not enough, however: the social 
Netherlands. Over the next few years, the Netherlands wants to security system also needs to be fit for purpose. The government 
work with other countries on ways to take more concerted action is reserving a structural budget of €30 million to achieve its 
to tackle worldwide challenges and future crises. A Global Health aforementioned aim. 
Strategy is being developed to strengthen the Dutch approach to 
health challenges across the world.  To improve incomes on the BES islands, the statutory minimum 
wage and basic benefits were increased by 10% (including 
The transition to a low-carbon, circular economy could inflation) on 1 January 2022. Child benefit has also been raised 
contribute significantly to reducing our negative spillover. to USD 89 per child per month. The government will submit a 
Linking Dutch efforts to develop a circular economy more bill on childcare in the Caribbean Netherlands to the House this 
effectively to international trade and investment would create year, aimed at creating a system of safe, high-quality, affordable 
opportunities. To achieve this, it is important to look for business childcare. In addition, temporary COVID measures have reduced 
models that promote circularity and reduce carbon intensity in the costs to consumers of telecom, energy and drinking water, 
the Netherlands, while also creating opportunities in other while the public bodies have received extra funds to mitigate 
countries, especially low-income countries. The different sectors the impact of the pandemic on vulnerable people. The 
involved do, however, need to have a better understanding of government will look at the extent to which the €30 million 
the risks and opportunities. Dutch businesses could contribute funding allocated under the coalition agreement can be used to 
to the development of a low-carbon, circular economy in low- make these grants structural. Central government has taken 
and middle-income countries, for example by providing over responsibility for grants to landlords in the social housing 
expertise and technology, redesigning production chains and sector, giving the public bodies more financial scope to develop 
investing in local processes. policies that will lead to a reduction in housing costs. More 
social housing will also be built. This policy contributes to the 
achievement of SDGs 1, 8, 10 and 11. 
3.4 Sustainable development in the 
Caribbean Netherlands Major projects completed in the past few years in the Caribbean 
This section examines efforts to achieve the SDGs in the Netherlands in the field of security and justice (SDG 16) include 
Caribbean part of the Netherlands – the islands of Bonaire, St the introduction of juvenile criminal law and the entry into force 
Eustatius and Saba (BES) – focusing on the social, economic, of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Fund Act and the robbery 
ecological and human rights aspects of sustainable development. prevention scheme. With the introduction of juvenile criminal 
law, schemes are now in place enabling out-of-court settlement 

43 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
3.5 International cooperation to organisations in the poorest countries as a key part of effective 
achieve the SDGs policy, accountability and transparency. As a world leader in this 
The 2030 Agenda is a task for all nations. The Kingdom’s area, we recently renewed the Power of Voices programme thus 
international cooperation efforts are therefore just as important reaffirming our commitment. Four grant instruments aimed at 
as our national implementation of the goals. The SDGs underpin strengthening civil society were set up in 2021, with a duration of 
Dutch foreign trade and development cooperation policy, and five years and a budget of more than €1.2 billion. These are 
serve as an important compass for foreign policy in general. Power of Voices, Power of Women, the SRHR Partnership Fund 
and Women, Peace and Security. Under these programmes local 
Multilateral strengthening of an integrated approach NGOs and Dutch civil society organisations team up to work on 
During its membership of the UN Security Council in 2018, the capacity building projects designed to achieve the SDGs.
Kingdom highlighted the importance of the SDGs as the 
ultimate conflict prevention agenda, by helping to put poverty, 
climate change, human rights violations and water stress on the 
agenda as the root causes of conflict between and within 
countries. The Security Council subsequently adopted 
Resolution 2417, condemning the starving of civilians as a 
method of warfare – as well as the unlawful denial of humanitarian 
access to civilian populations. 
Through long-term predictable, unearmarked funding to UN 
development agencies, the Netherlands is contributing to a more 
effective UN development system and thus supporting the 
implementation of the SDGs at global and country level. The 
Kingdom is also working in human rights forums to promote the Minister for Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation, Liesje 
SDGs, as human rights and the SDGs are linked and mutually Schreinemacher during her visit to Kenya, April 2022 (photo Luuk 
reinforce each other. For instance, we spearheaded the resolution Toormans)
15
to end child marriage and the resolution on violence against 
16
women (together with France). This means that the Netherlands The Netherlands contributed to the international pandemic 
has been able to put important issues on the agenda, including response by providing support packages to prevent the spread 
at the 2018 UN General Assembly, where we took a pioneering of infection, delivering humanitarian aid and reducing the 
role in tabling the first resolution on sexual harassment, as part of socioeconomic impact of the pandemic. UN organisations, the 
broader efforts to prevent and eliminate violence against women. International Monetary Fund (IMF) and multilateral development 
banks played a crucial role in mitigating the economic crisis in 
Support for the most vulnerable people so that no developing countries.
one is left behind
To achieve the SDGs, specific support is required for the most As a major humanitarian donor, the Netherlands offers assistance 
vulnerable people and to ensure that everyone is reached (‘Leave and future prospects to communities affected by natural or 
No One Behind’). This is only possible if these groups are given a man-made disasters, including conflicts. The funding provided 
stronger voice and can help shape policy to deliver the SDGs. is largely unearmarked to enable the UN or civil society 
COVID-19 has curbed civil society in many parts of the world. For organisations to respond quickly and effectively in emergencies. 
years, the Netherlands has been investing in building grassroots Boosting resilience and building self-reliance are key policy 
components. Since 2017, the Netherlands has emphasised the 
need for mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS) 
15 UN Resolution: Child, early and forced marriage ().
during and after conflicts. 
16 UN Resolution: Violence against women (document). 

45 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
Coherent approach to the climate-food-water nexus health insurance and the Global Index Insurance Facility has 
The Netherlands supports developing countries and partnerships facilitated access to climate insurance for 600,000 farmers. 
in order to help combat climate change and its effects worldwide. 
We were one of the sponsors of the NDC Partnership, initiated The Netherlands is committed to ensuring sustainable economic 
the Global Commission on Adaptation and set up the Global development in low- and lower-middle-income countries by 
Centre for Adaptation, and also hosted the successful Climate improving the local business climate, enhancing entrepreneurship 
Adaptation Summit in 2021. The Netherlands’ contribution to and promoting productivity and innovation. In 2021, for 
climate finance for developing countries has increased to €1.3 instance, we supported more than 264,000 jobs and 16,700 
billion, made up of equal parts of public and private funding. business plans, and helped improve the working conditions of 
The Netherlands allocates more than half of its climate finance to nearly 2.8 million agricultural and factory workers. To spotlight 
adaptation. Globally, this is only a quarter, leading the UN the problem of child labour, we organised a major conference in 
17
Secretary-General to call for a 50/50 balance between adaptation 2020 called Taking Next Steps. In 2021, the Netherlands was 
and mitigation at the Climate Adaptation Summit. The Glasgow the first EU member state to become a Pathfinder Country of 
Climate Pact aims to double funding for adaptation by 2025. the ILO’s Alliance 8.7 – the global multi-stakeholder platform for 
18
Together with Tajikistan, the Netherlands will co-host the UN eradicating child labour (SDG 8.7). 
2023 Water Conference. 
The business sector can make a significant contribution to 
The Netherlands is helping partner countries build capacity in achieving the SDGs. A growing number of Dutch companies are 
order to address climate change, water scarcity and food embracing the SDGs as a sustainability compass. The 
security (SDGs 13, 6 and 2) in tandem. One concrete objective government encourages them to actively solve global challenges 
is for 8 million hectares of farmland to be managed sustainably together when trading with foreign partners. With this in mind, 
by 2030. Moreover, the Netherlands has helped many countries it organises trade missions, mainly for SMEs, focusing on 
in Africa, Asia and the Middle East to improve water management challenges in SDG-relevant sectors. Instruments such as the 
and ensure sustainable access to clean drinking water and Sustainable Enterprise and Food Security Facility and the SDG 
sanitation. The Netherlands has also supported organisations Partnership Facility support Dutch companies involved in private 
involved in managing transboundary rivers and optimising the sector development in emerging markets, thus utilising the 
use of water in agriculture. strength of trade and industry to achieve the SDGs. In recent 
years, the Netherlands has also set up multi-stakeholder 
Innovative finance and partnerships initiatives to make international value chains more sustainable. 
Small businesses and people living in poverty will be able to Examples include the Clothing and Textile Agreement and the 
invest if they have access to financial services, thereby helping to Dutch Initiative for Sustainable Cocoa (DISCO). In 2015 the 
create decent jobs and sustainable economic growth (SDG 8). To Netherlands launched the Amsterdam Declarations Partnership. 
reach disadvantaged groups, the Netherlands is supporting the Over the next few years, the government will lobby for greener 
development of an innovative range of new or improved financial trade instruments in line with the Paris and Glasgow agreements. 
products and services, including digital solutions. Over nine 
million businesses and individuals have benefited from financial The government is endeavouring to bring public and private 
services provided under Dutch-funded programmes, and some investment in line with the SDGs, for example via trade 
25 new financial products have been introduced. The Dutch diplomacy and agreements with companies and investors, as 
development bank FMO is a world leader in the fields of social well as through Dutch legislation and public funding. Since 
development and sustainability. Its MASSIF programme, for public funding can be an important catalyst for mobilising 
example, has provided financial services to 5.7 million businesses private capital, the government is seeking to develop investable 
in the past year. The One Acre Fund, a non-profit social 
enterprise, has issued loans to 1.3 million smallholders, the 
17 Taking Next Steps – Ending child labour by 2025.
Health Insurance Fund has provided 700,000 households with 
18 ALLIANCE 8.7 (alliance87.org).

47 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
for knowledge sharing and collaboration. Responding to this These challenges and lessons are not unique to the Netherlands. 
need and engaging these actors, for instance through Many of them are in evidence across the Kingdom, despite the 
ongoing stakeholder dialogues, can enhance the very different situations encountered. All countries are facing a 
government’s own efforts. Involving stakeholders in massive task, but the SDGs offer us a shared vision of the future. 
formulating and implementing policy yields valuable insights The Netherlands will continue to work towards achieving these 
and creates a climate of cooperation. It is important that this goals in partnership with others, both at home and abroad. 
process be as inclusive as possible.
• Honest messages about things that need to change are 
essential to raise awareness even further and garner broader 
public support. It is difficult for everyone to change their 
behaviour, but that awkward conversation is necessary to be 
able to make the transition to a sustainable society.
• Greater interaction between efforts at home and abroad is 
vital to prevent negative spillover effects and create 
opportunities for low-income countries. By considering the 
opportunities sector by sector, national measures to promote 
circularity, for example, could go hand in hand with trade and 
investment in the Global South.

49 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
The SDG Aruba National Commission was reinstalled in 2018 
with a higher-level Ministerial and broader representation of 
government departments along the 5 P’s (People, Planet, 
20
Prosperity, Peace, and Partnerships) . Expanding on its previous 
decree, the Commission is mandated by the Government of 
Aruba to coordinate and give strategic direction to drive the 
SDG implementation process in Aruba and adheres to the 
UNDP proposed MAPS approach to execute its mandate.
The SDG commission focused on integrating the economic, 
environmental, and social dimensions of sustainable 
development to improve policy coherence and implementation 
across the board. By convening in a structured manner, it Figure 4.2: Nine accelerators* across the pillars coveringsocial, 
stimulated the alignment of the SDGs in a complementary environmental, and economic dimensions.
manner to government objectives. The roadmap also presented 
* People: Quality of Life and Wellbeing, Youth Empowerment 
outcomes of thematic areas, or accelerators which can catalyze 
Planet: Natural Resource Management 
sustainable development in Aruba, respectively. For Aruba the 
Prosperity: Entrepreneurship & Enabled Business Environment, 
following 9 accelerators across the 5 Pillars were adopted.
Energy Efﬁciency & Energy Diversiﬁcation, Sustainable Tourism 
Peace: Strengthen Institutional Quality and Capacity, National 
Statistical System 
Going from planning to action, the Indicator Working Group 
Partnerships: Aruba as a Model for Sustainable Development.
(IWG) was also re-instituted to stimulate informed and results-
based policy making. In 2018, the process of developing the surveys, planning and alignment exercises were conducted to 
National Strategic Plan (NSP) 2020-2022 “Nos Plan, Nos Futuro” foster coherence in the 9 accelerator programs of the NSP. A 
using the 9 accelerators as the basis to develop the national major hurdle was the assessment of the necessary financing of 
development plan for Aruba and for national planning to be the policy actions, which also made linking the required 
done differently. The NSP 2020-2022 is Aruba’s medium-term information for monitoring purposes of the NSP difficult. A tool 
plan, with a long-term vision for 2030, and is one of the most was developed which provides details of the proposed action 
important mechanisms for the implementation of the SDGs in with costing including the implementation description for each 
Aruba. The nine accelerators from the Aruba “Roadmap for new or ongoing activity.
SDG Implementation” became the nine programs the NSP. 
The main purpose of the IWG is to lead and coordinate the 
Using a participatory approach, Expert Working Groups process of monitoring and evaluation of the SDGs and address 
(ExWGs), appointed by ministerial decrees, were instituted to relevant issues regarding data availability for the SDGs. To deal 
draw on the expertise of the government departments, the with the lack of a strong National Statistical System (NSS), a 
private sector, NGOs, and academia to put forward a different approach was chosen to inform decision making and 
comprehensive NSP. The UNDP SDG Accelerator and Bottleneck monitoring.  The IWG focuses on assessing data availability and 
Assessment (ABA) tool was intended to be used as a needs of different resources and the compilation and development 
methodology to develop the NSP however it was dropped due of data for the SDG indicators, and the localization of SDG 
to time and capacity constraints. Various additional public indicators to reflect the national context. As the technical capacity 
increased, several localized feasibility studies, bottlenecks and 
20 The government departments represented in the SDG Aruba National 
needs assessments of SDG-indicator were conducted as the first 
Commission are: The departments include those of Social Affairs (DSZ), 
phase of a national SDG framework, such as the SDG Indicator 
Nature & Environment (DNM), Economic Affairs, Commerce and 
Assessment (AMIGA) and the Comprehensive Indicator 
Industry (DEZHI), Finance (DirFin), Foreign Affairs (DBB) and the Central 
Framework Aruba (SDG CIFRA).
Bureau of Statistics (CBS).

51 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
A baseline measurement of SDG indicators conducted in 2018, 
showed that 46 indicators could be calculated. During the 
follow up report on SDG measurements of 2021, a total of 67 
indicators could be produced. The challenge remains to address 
the data gaps on gender segregation, the environmental, as 
well as peace and justice related SDGs.
Oversight institutions conducted SDG assessments and or 
incorporated these in their reports. In 2018, the Supreme Audit 
Institution of Aruba (ARA), assessed the preparedness for 
implementation of Sustainable Development Goals in Aruba 
and recognized that the government had clear intentions to 
implement the SDGs, and recommended that a proper SDG public service announcements displayed in the local theater. 
foundation be laid for the realization of the SDGs, specifically in 
terms of mandates, definition of responsibilities and processes of departments from the government, private sector, NGOs, 
development of monitoring system, funding of SDGs and and academia. From the outset the commission conducted a 
strengthen data collection. The ARA continuous to integrate a series of roadshows targeting higher Councils of State, ministries 
sustainable development approach in its reporting. and government departments, academia, civil society, 
community-based organizations as well as private sector interest 
The Social and Economic Council (SER) of Aruba advises the groups. The commission together with the AWG developed an 
government and parliament on social and economic policy.  The SDG communication strategy that facilitates ongoing 
adoption of the SDGs in the role of the Council and the engagement in promoting and advancing the implementation 
incorporation of sustainable development in its advisory work of SDGs in the country. The SDGs were translated into 
and reports (available on their website) contributes to the whole Papiamento, an SDG website was developed focusing on local 
of government approach. initiatives, posters placed on bus stops throughout the island, 
and videos featuring local stories on the SDGs. The videos are 
On a national level the Parliament of Aruba established an SDG featured on the SDG Aruba website, are shared on social media, 
Parliamentary Committee starting in 2018, in line with this, the and run at the local cinemas and on national television. 
SDG Commission reported to the Parliament on progress of the 
SDG implementation. On the Kingdom level, the parliament of 
Aruba is part of the Inter Parliamentary Kingdom Conference 4.2 Progress on the goals
(IPKO), which is a consultative body between all the four (4) With the technical support of the UNDP and ECLAC through a 
Parliaments of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. In 2018, IPKO MAPS mission, a series of catalyst-based measures to accelerate 
decided to structure their work to the SDGs. The progress of the progress of goals and targets were developed. These 
SDG implementation in Aruba together with parliamentarians of considered the integrated nature of the agenda 2030, the 
Curaçao, the Netherlands and St. Maarten is reported on during specific national context, including the lack of institutional 
the IPKO. capacity with the need to improve the economic, social, and 
environmental dimensions of sustainable development to 
In line with the MAPS based approach, to raise public awareness guarantee a balanced development. These catalytic measures, 
on the 2030 Agenda and ensure that the principles and goals of ‘accelerators,’ which in the NSP have been converted into 9 
sustainable development found in the 2030 Agenda are fully programs (see figure 2) and delineated according the 5 pillars of 
integrated into national and sub-national policy formulation, the Agenda 2030, are an important vehicle to implement and 
planning and budgetary processes, the SDG commission monitor and evaluate progress of the SDGs.
instituted an SDG Awareness Working Group (AWG), comprised 

53 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
ECONOMY 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
1 Total of nature protected area (as 20,9 20,9 20,9 24,3
a % of total land area)F
2 Coverage of protected areas in 0,0 0,0 0,21 0,21
relation to marine areas (in %)F
3 Access to basic water services (% 98,8
of population)G
4 Access to baisc sanitation 99,8
services (% of population)G
Source: F: Directorate of Nature and Environment; G: Central Bureau of Statistics
Table 4.1. Aruba Key Indicator Country Overview

55 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
The Quality-of-Life accelerator and NSP program encapsulates represents 16.9% of the total population, while children up to 
various aspects and attributes of our social, health, economic, 14 years of age represent 16.6%. The rapid aging presents 
and environmental conditions. A strong focus of this accelerator challenges for the provision for adequate healthcare and 
is on increasing the standard of living and educational attainment support for the elderly as well as for the sustainability of current 
while improving our mental and physical, health, particularly for pension schemes. The old-age dependency ratio currently 
the most marginalized within society. Even though Aruba does stands at 25.4. The relatively high prevalence of NCDs in the 
not have a national definition of what constitutes poverty, a elderly population contribute to the higher prevalence of 
multi-dimensional approach to poverty is being considered, disability in the elderly. Given the demographic shifts of the 
which is not limited to lack of income. In 2019, 8,3% of the population, the government of Aruba has dedicated special 
21
population lived on less than $21.70 with the proportion of attention to address the needs of the elderly. 
persons living on less than $21.70 a day was highest amongst 
unemployed persons (23.6%). Lifting both the living standards and the empowerment of 
women and girls are central to and has a catalytic effect on 
Aruba adheres to the human rights-based policy approach and achieving the SDGs. Data and gender statistics are critical to 
has made efforts to not leave anyone behind. During the building policies and programs that enhances women and men’s 
COVID-19 pandemic an expansion of temporary social social and economic resilience, for Aruba certain data points are 
protection schemes for both business and the employed was lacking. Maintaining a gender lens means among other things 
developed through a strong collaborating effort by the that data must be collected across institutions and sectors, for a 
government of Aruba and NGOs. Persons who (temporarily) lost thorough understanding of the situation of women and girls, 
their job because of COVID-19, received monthly financial compared to men and boys, without this policy risks being 
assistance. In total, between April 2020 and October 2021, gender-blind and at best, ignoring, and at worst, potentially 
12,246 persons received this financial assistance, worth 75.6 worsening the circumstances. With the support of UN-Women 
million Aruban Florins. In addition, financial assistance was MCO office for the Caribbean, the first national gender policy of 
provided to businesses in the form of a salary subsidy, for those Aruba was developed, focusing on four strategic areas; 
that could not afford to fully compensate their employees. overcoming structural barriers to gender equality, increase 
Between May 2020 and October 2021, an average of 1,345 decent work opportunities, enhancing access to justice and 
employers received this salary subsidy, on behalf of an average gender sensitive health care.
of 16,500 employees. Due to the impact of COVID-19 on the 
whole of society, including the income of households was Aruba’s healthcare sector is facing a significant challenge due to 
severely affected and in 2020, 23% of households reported not the high indices of Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) and is 
being able to make ends meet and pay for all their expenses. posing a burden on the health and universal healthcare insurance 
With support of the Government of the Netherlands, assistance system. A general health survey conducted in 2016/2017, 
programs were established, including a food-voucher program indicated that 79% of persons 20 years and older are overweight 
in 2020 for the most vulnerable, with 7,820 persons receiving or obese. Additionally, data from the General Health Insurance 
assistance, which was continued in 2021 by the Government of of Aruba in 2020 indicated that about one of every three (36.5%) 
Aruba through the local food bank with 6,201 heads of of Aruba’s patient suffered from at least one chronic health 
households receiving assistance. condition.
Aruba’s demographics, the Population and Housing Census that In line with this, a National Multi-sectoral Action Plan for the 
was conducted in 2020 indicated a rapid aging of the population prevention and control of NCDs has been developed to address 
of Aruba, the elderly (persons 65 years and older) currently the prevention and control of NCDs over the period 2020-2030, 
aligned with various international WHO and regional bodies, 
such as the PAHO and CARICOM frameworks on NCDs.
21 International Poverty Line for High Income Countries; males 8.0%, 
female 8.6%

57 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
and the needs of the local labor market. In addition, more To strengthen the safety of youth and children, the Social Crisis 
st
attention was given to the inclusion of 21 century skills in Plan program (2018-2021) seeks to strengthen the child 
classrooms. However, in 2020 (during the pandemic), the youth protection system across sectors. With key advancements being 
unemployment rate rose again to 25.9%. Quality issues related made in reducing waiting lists across the system, introduction of 
to teaching capacity, learning and facilities are still prevalent. a national child safety code legislation, providing training and 
certification of professionals in the sector, and a better 
monitoring system to foster the health and wellbeing of all 
children of Aruba.
Planet (SDGs 6, 12, 13, 14 and 15)
SDG Target
SDG 6 No data trend availability
SDG 12 No data trend availability
SDG 13 Target 13.1: Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural Decrease
disasters in all countries.
Data: 2004 and 2016
SDG 14 Target 14.3: Minimize and address the impacts of ocean acidification, including through enhanced Steady high
scientific cooperation at all levels. 
Data: 2015 - 2018
Target 14.5: By 2020, conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, consistent with Increase
national and international law and based on the best available scientific information. 
Data: 2010 - 2020
SDG 15 Target 15.1: By 2020, ensure the conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and Increase
inland freshwater ecosystems and their services, in particular forests, wetlands, mountains, and 
drylands, in line with obligations under international agreements. 
Data: 2000 and 2020
Trend Table 4.2. Aruba SDG Indicator trends in the environmental dimension
The purpose of the accelerator is to lead the turn around and as economic development as imperative to build a resilient 
mitigate the adverse effects of developmental activities on the future. 
environment, coordinated and integrated natural resource 
management focusing on policies and processes to be put in Structured actions on waste management remain necessary. 
place and reviewed and addressing areas of potential tradeoffs. Importing a large share of all products, has a compounding 
effect on waste production. In 2015, Aruba amended legislation 
The government works with different stakeholders to ban free distribution of single use plastic bags. A new law was 
(governmental, non-governmental, private sector) to implement introduced in 2019 including a ban on all importation, production 
the planet pillar including forging collaborations for data and provision for purchase of single use plastics, styrofoam as 
production. Its policy plans ‘Towards a Balanced Future 2018- well as sunblock containing oxybenzone that is harmful to coral 
2021’ was developed through multi-stakeholder sessions. For reefs. The common linear solid waste landfilling policy has been 
its next policy cycle, collaborations will need to focus on challenged by the in 2019 Circular Economy 2050 vision. 
financing, technology, data sharing, capacity building and Current commercial recycling and governmental landfilling 
expanding its partnership modalities to further align interests activities will be readdressed to become circular. As a small 
and resources to support implementation. Having an integrated island developing state Aruba will search for bending the linear 
approach towards nature and environmental protection economy by closing resources cycles like water, compostable, 
considering the interlinkages with health and wellbeing as well construction waste, cooking oil and plastics on the island. 

59 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
SDG Target
SDG 9 Target 9.2.1: Promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and, by 2030, significantly raise Decreasing trend
industry's share of employment and gross domestic product, in line with national circumstances, and 
double its share in least developed countries. 
Data: 2010 - 2018
SDG 10 Target 10.2: By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all, Decrease
irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or economic or other status. 
Data: 2000, and 2019
SDG 11 Target 11.5: By 2030, significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people affected Decreasing trend 
and substantially decrease the direct economic losses relative to global gross domestic product before COVID-19
caused by disasters, including water-related disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and 
people in vulnerable situations. 
Data: 2004, 2016, 2019, and 2020
SDG 12 No data trend availability
Trend Table 4.3. Aruba SDG Indicator trends in the economic dimension
The Economy of Aruba has seen moderate growth in the last The COVID-19 pandemic has had an unprecedented impact on 
decade. The premise of the accelerator activities focused on the economy of Aruba. The main factor being the slowdown in 
fostering new business growth by helping businesses and tourism. Aruba’s economy is strongly dependent on international 
entrepreneurs take advantage of all the available emerging tourism as its main economic activity and income, with more than 
opportunities and to help them innovate. Policy efforts are 80 percent of GDP generated directly and indirectly from tourism 
concentrated on stimulating the business and investment services. In 2019, nearly 13 million tourists visited the island and 
climate. Aruba aspires toward a new economic model which is the GDP stood at 3,349 million US$. The impact of the pandemic 
sustainable, inclusive, smart and resilient. Circular economy is showed that the number of tourists dropped with 68% and the 
an essential model to realize this.  The first phase of fiscal reform GDP with an estimated 23% relative to 2019. As a result, 
to stimulate entrepreneurship has been introduced, with the macroeconomic indicators dropped significantly: exports and 
introduction of a Competition Law, and to increase the ease of imports of goods and services, private investment and private 
doing business the digital infrastructure is being enhanced. As and public consumption. According to estimations made by 
for creating labor market incentives, in line with the principle of means of the macro-economic model developed by the 
leaving no one behind, a strong focus is on creating opportunities Government, the Aruban economy experienced a nominal GDP 
for the most marginalized groups, including those with contraction of 24.7 percent in 2020 compared to 2019 followed 
disabilities on the labor market. by a growth of 13.6 percent in 2021 compared to 2020.
Aruba Tourism Authority rolling out various sustainable tourism 
projects. Picture credit Aruba Tourism Authority

61 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
Peace (SDG 16)
SDG Target
SDG 16 Target 16.1: Significantly reduce all forms of violence and related death rates everywhere. Data: Fluctuating trend
2000 - 2020
Target 16.5: Substantially reduce corruption and bribery in all their forms. Data: 2018 - 2020 Increasing trend
Trend Table 4. Aruba SDG Indicator trends in the peace and security dimension
Aruba is a vibrant democracy, with active political participation, Aruba’s demographic constellation consists of persons from 
active civil society organizations, free media and fundamental over 130 different countries and 98 different nationalities 
rights, which are laid down in the constitution. Maintaining a residing in Aruba with 37% of the population being foreign-
vibrant democracy, requires public trust in government born. Documented migrants have equal access to work, health 
institutions. The digital transformation of government services, care, education, and housing. Children with a maternal language 
innovation and the strengthening of the capacity and other than the two official languages of Aruba, Dutch or 
performance of government institutions is also aimed to foster Papiamento, are offered a language program to facilitate the 
transparency and accountability. integration in the educational system of Aruba.
Aruba stands to gain in institutional efficiency and institutional Aruba experienced a sudden influx of undocumented migrants, 
capacity through digitalization of its government services. The due to the ongoing political, human rights and socio-economic 
Government through a public private partnership is currently developments in Venezuela. Undocumented migrants are 
implementing a national innovation strategy of Aruba with an susceptible to trafficking and exploitation, the Coordination 
ambitious and comprehensive digitalization of the government Center on Human Trafficking and Migrant Smuggling Aruba 
program, where digital government services will be accessible educates the community with training and awareness campaigns, 
24/7. The eGovernment objective is to create a new dynamic assist trafficking victims to receive and provide information. The 
and transparent relation between the government and its influx poses pressure on the social welfare system, labor market 
citizens: a cycle that will become simpler, more inclusive, and as well as on the educational and healthcare systems 
more productive across all segments of society. compounding the structural challenges faced by Aruba as a 
Small Island Development State. Undocumented migrant 
Continued efforts are needed in upholding democracy, good children and youth have access to education and Aruba 
governance, and human rights. Advancements have been made requested and received financial and technical support from the 
to strengthen these aspects by instituting a Bureau of Integrity Netherlands to this end. Both UNHCR and IOM have in country 
(BIA), a central coordination point within the Government that presence in Aruba due to the increased influx of migrants. 
addresses integrity violation issues.  A renewed Corporate Launching various projects to strengthen the immigration chain, 
Governance Code has been formulated for State Owned secure the borders, as well developing and launching an 
Enterprises (SEO) and legislation has been proposed, drafted or awareness campaign targeting human trafficking called ‘Habri 
enacted such as the legislation on financing of political parties, Bo Wowo’ (Open Your Eyes). The COVID-19 vaccination 
and the establishment of an Ombudsman. In December 2021, program is accessible to all persons on the island regardless of 
the National Ordinance Integrity of Ministers was enacted. their document or undocumented status.
Strengthening partners in the judicial and social sectors, a 
formal collaborative initiative the ‘Veiligheidshuis’ (Safety The data needs and priorities are a necessity for sustainable 
House) targeting families with multiple and complex problems. evidence-based decision-making and policymaking. Aruba 
The objective is to prevent and mitigate recidivism, serious lacks a robust and coordinated national statistical system which 
social nuisance, and crime. results in a limited results-based monitoring capacity. 
Collaboration and cooperation between data producing entities 

63 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
pandemic for SIDS. In addition, a working paper on ‘Civil service 4.3 Means of implementation
capacities in the SDG era’ was produced with the OECD and 
based on the SDG capacity building program of Aruba. The Financing
analysis provides the major capacity areas that can support a The implementation of the SDG requires vast financial resources, 
shift from siloed policy making to more integrated approaches. the Aruba Roadmap for SDG implementation identified the 
Currently, OECD and Aruba developed a project to pilot the following financing sources: domestic resource mobilization 
PCSD methodology of the OECD in SIDS, however, due to through re-aligning expenditure and delivering existing financial 
funding restrictions the project has not yet been initiated. resources more effectively and efficiently. In the budgetary note 
to all government departments issued in 2020, the Minister of 
Aruba is an overseas country & territory (OCT) of the European Finance stated the requirement to align the policy objectives to 
Union (EU). Within the EU OCT Aruba participates in different the SDGs until 2022. 
programs to strengthen scientific education (SISSTEM), conserve 
marine biodiversity, working together on climate resilience The national strategic plan provides the main direct and tangible 
projects, sustainable energy projects, and early warning systems. financing mechanism for the SDGs implementation in Aruba in 
this reporting period. However, adjustments had to be made as 
Within the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the six Caribbean drastically fewer public revenues were expected due to COVID-
islands have formalized partnership agreements on the topic of 19. An NSP-COVID note was produced at the end of April 2020 
disaster risk, nature conservancy through the nature alliance, a to allocate the limited public funds to reactivate the economy or 
data collaboration to foster statistical collaboration and to generate financial benefit for the island. The criteria were based 
provide technical assistance to each other. on a three-track approach of the UNDP Policy for Post Conflict 
Employment Creation, Income Generation and Reintegration 
Aruba is also active in south- south/north-south/triangular (2009.) Resulting in a one-off allocation of AWG 4.1 million in 
cooperation in various fields sharing its lessons learned or 2020. 
knowledge with other or learning from their experience. Aruba 
engaged with Jamaica to learn from Jamaica’s experience with The following projects were initially earmarked for financing 
SDG implementation, in turn Aruba shared its institutional through the NSP investment resources.
framework and integration modality experience with Trinidad & 
Tobago and Belize and at various conferences. Although funds were allocated for the NSP-projects it was still 
difficult to make optimized use of the resources available due to 
The SDGs Commission has been active in engaging local several aspects in addition to the focus on COVID-19, e.g. 
stakeholders in society, including individuals, families and competing programs, lack of available human capacity, and 
communities, interest organizations, and religious institutions, technical expertise, which play a role in the process of the 
civil society, academia, the media, voluntary associations, the financing of projects. No evaluation has yet been done regarding 
private sector, industry, parliament and higher councils of state the use of the NSP investment resources of the 2020 Government 
in support of and to spur on their agency to actively contribute Budget. Due to the ongoing financial and economic crisis of the 
and drive SDG implementation from their respective field of island, the Government’s budget of 2021 had fewer funds 
work. A program called the SDG Young Voices was initiated by available to allocate specifically for the NSP-projects. No 
the Commission where youth have been selected to create comprehensive information is available on the budget allocated 
awareness and stimulate engagement among their peers. The to sectoral plans linked to the SDGs.
young voices receive training to fulfill their roles and have 
engaged in community activities, including with other youth 
organizations and collaborates with the Youth Parliament on a 
project ‘Voices of Change’ to stimulate debate among primary 
school children to on topics addressing SDGs.

65 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
policies on an academic level, while also empowering a regional 
workforce with the skills and capacity to make these policies a 
reality. SISSTEM is funded by the European Union, the 
establishment of the faculty is being implemented by the UNDP 
(infrastructure) and the academic program through a partnership 
between the University of Aruba and KU Leuven. The University 
or Aruba hopes to integrate the Center of Excellence for 
Sustainable Development of SIDS (COE) into this program. 
Civil Servants participating in the capacity building course.
tailor-made training program following a gap assessment, and 
provide training to Aruban civil servants and NGOs. Since the 
SDGs are based on a results-oriented management system, 
these courses ranged from general management competencies 
to more advanced statistical knowledge to build general policy- 
as well as SDG-specific knowledge to help lead Aruba to a more 
sustainable island through the SDGs.
Aruban civil servants, in addition, regularly participate in training 
provided by the UN system and its agencies, such as those by 
UNPAN, UNDESA, and ECLAC.
4.4 Best practices, initiatives from 
society
Students engaging with technical lab equipment at the SISSTEM 
SDG 4 – University of Aruba: innovative and program. Picture credit University of Aruba
open-minded
As higher education plays a pivotal role in achieving the SDGs. SDG 5 – Futura Aruba’s SDG Innovation Lab - 
The University of Aruba aims to nurture the next generation of Supernova: Experimental Pop-Up Studio for Girls and 
innovators, educators, researchers and leaders that will be able Women
to solve and address these pressing challenges and integrates Harnessing the meaning of SDG 5, achieving gender equality 
the SDGs and sustainability aspects within the educational and empowering all women and girls, Supernova aims to 
curricula of its various faculties. The University of Aruba also empower more young women and girls by developing their 
established the SISSTEM (Sustainable Island Solutions through skills as current and next-generation of purpose-driven 
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics), a bachelor, innovators. In this context, Futura developed a project ‘Stem 
master’s and PhD program with a focus on sustainable the Gap!’, with the aim of contributing to reducing the gender 
development in Small Island Developing States, which aims to gap that exists in the STEM fields educational attainment by 
find sustainable island solutions for the future through multi and sparking an interest in STEM among girls and encouraging them 
inter-disciplinary approaches. It will embody sustainability to pursue a path in STEM education. A program addressing self-

67 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
SDG 14 - ScubbleBubbles - Youth Organization 
Restoring Coral and Healthy Marine Life
The ScubbleBubbles Foundation is a youth organization 
creating more local youth active involvement in coral restoration 
and conservation, reef surveys and fish population research. 
Starting of as a scuba youth club, soon after viewing the state of 
the coral, realization sunk of the need for an active coral 
restoration and preservation of ocean assets organization in 
Aruba. Currently, with two coral nurseries that grows six different 
coral structure, the empowered youth volunteers, are planting 
corals, doing underwater clean-ups at popular beaches and 
give presentations to other kids creating a generation of 
environmentalists, conservationists and create more knowledge 
about marine life. 
Aruba Airport Authority multi-use car and solar park and giving back to 
the community. Picture credit Aruba Airport Authority
various actions implemented in favor of the fight against climate 
change. Additionally, as part of the Environment & Sustainable 
Airport Community goal, the ‘Wings of Hope’ community 
program based on five of the SDGs is making a positive impact Reef care and conservation methods underwater. Picture credit 
in the Aruban community. ScubbleBubbles Foundation

69 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
4.5 Lessons learned, emerging reducing future non-sustainable expenditures, and delivering 
challenges for the future existing financial resources more effectively and efficiently is 
Aruba is one of the early implementers of the SDGs and among essential. This will require, developing new (international) 
the first ten countries globally to receive a MAPS mission to partnership modalities that can advance private capital 
develop an SDG implementation roadmap, which was able to mobilization and FDI, targeted especially in innovative projects 
set up a robust institutional framework with a centralized SDG that promote sustainability. 
commission mandated to provide strategic direction and 
implement the SDGs in Aruba. Forming a solid foundation For this we will need to strengthen the transformative impact of 
together with its subsidiary bodies, working groups, government the policy enabling environment requiring an integrative 
departments and engagement strategy with local stakeholders, approach, and a rethink on inclusive and strengthened 
it has been paving the way for the implementation the SDGs in governance mechanisms. Significant investments, both human, 
Aruba. financial and technological for targeted capacity building for a 
strengthened institutional capacity. Access to technology and 
Despite many efforts, the global COVID-19 pandemic has set us finance to invest in transformative changes to change our 
back in achieving the SDGs and served to further highlight our economic model and diversify our economy and attracting 
vulnerabilities and emerging challenges to build a more resilient investments to mitigate and adapt to climate change. Without 
future. In fact, the advent of pandemic has resulted in a negative this, realizing the needed change and results offered through 
growth rate in 2020. The economy is not expected to fully SDG implementation remains difficult to measure whether 
recover until 2025. efforts have resulted in the desired impact in society. Aruba may 
be at cross-roads but achieving progress will take time, as much 
The biggest lesson learnt in the process has been the strong remains to be done.
emphasis and success on the development of many policies and 
plans and less on joint program implementation, resource 
mobilization and access to finance, which has challenged 4.6 Conclusion and next steps
operationalization, coherence and effective implementation of With determination, Aruba started its 2030 agenda by 
policies and plans. This was exacerbated during COVID-19 as pinpointing nine accelerators. After five years some areas have 
Aruba strives to recover from the pandemic with limited human accelerated, some have stagnated, and some are at a point 
and financial capital to benefit a better life for all in the Aruban where the development gains could be lost as shown in the data 
community. trend. The COVID-19 caused a setback and the pandemic made 
it clear that ‘business as usual” is not an option. Aruba’s COVID 
In this context, a continued challenge remains the development recovery plan “Repositioning Our Sails”, has been aligned with 
of a National Statistical System and production of remaining the SDGs, also containing the collective aspirations and actions 
SDG indicators and a results framework for monitoring and towards sustainable development. The next NSP medium-term 
evaluation of policy, which is imperative for informed decision plan for the period 2023-2026 will focus on integrating the 
and policy making and timely monitoring & evaluation of national reform programs. As the NSP has been developed 
policies and plans. Policy coherence will also serve to create based on the 5 SDG pillars, the SDG approach and focus on the 
more effective planning and implementation. economic, social and environmental dimensions, will help align 
initiatives and foster policy coherence for stronger impact.
The protracted COVID-19 pandemic, and allocation of financial 
resources to mitigate the negative economic impact especially The five-year efforts in this report made it clear that Aruba is 
on vulnerable groups, has further reduced financial resources committed and should continue to be committed, and that 
necessary to build a more resilient future. As government sustainable development must be a sustained and dedicated 
budgets are insufficient to cover the required investments and whole of society effort. The reality is that this is a time of 
the levels of private sector investment and FDI have been low, increasingly interconnected global challenges, such as climate 

71 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
 Curaçao
5
5.1 Introduction local actions it must take to tackle effective SDG implementation 
In 2016 Curaçao adopted its National Development Plan in a timely manner, and which bottlenecks hinder such 
(NDPC) and was one of the first countries to link the SDGs to its implementation. Official data is also explicitly reported on the 
national development plan. The plan was developed using a six priority SDGs and will be expanded in the future to include 
very broad stakeholder engagement process, and came about data on the local performance indicators. A dashboard is being 
after the country became an independent country within the developed to be able to monitor and communicate progress on 
Kingdom of the Netherlands on October 10, 2010. Nation achieving the SDGs with the community, the indicators will 
building has been, therefore, an integral part of the NDPC. The make the progress more quantifiable and easier to review 
NDPC, titled ‘Building on strengths’, has five themes that are periodically, also by peers. Periodical reviews will make it easier 
linked to four SDGs (see figure 5.1). to adjust where necessary and hence making the process of 
achieving the SDGs more transparent to the community. 
Another important outcome of the Roadmap is that an 
organizational structure has now been established within the 
government with a strong link to society. In this structure, the 
integrality of the agenda clearly emerges by having all government 
ministries work together and a clear responsibility for the Statistical 
Education Economy
Commission, led by our Central Bureau for Statistics (CBS-
Curaçao) (see section 3.1). The link to society is materialized 
Sustainability
through Roundtable sessions, the annual SDG Action Week, and 
information sessions at schools and special events.
Good governance 
National identity 
& leadership
The collaboration between the government ministries has 
resulted in the 2017-2021 Government Program and its 
associated budgets being linked to the SDGs in 2019. The 
Result Based Management (RBM) method offered support for 
linking the SDGs and hence making SDGs finance in Curaçao 
more concrete and transparent. This process gave a good first 
Figure 5.1: NDP priorities embedded in the SDG’s impression on how much of the government spending can be 
attributed to which sustainable goal. The new government 
Curaçao started its journey towards localizing the 2030 Agenda program that will be implemented in March 2022 will also be 
in 2018 with a MAPS (Mainstreaming, Acceleration and Policy linked to the SDGs as well as our government budget 2023.
Support) mission led by UNDP in which the alignment of our 
NDPC and other policy documents to the SGDs were analyzed Methodology
and priorities were fine-tuned through a participatory approach. As in 2017, the elaboration of this VNR report has once again 
From this analysis emerged a Roadmap where accelerators and ensured a further strengthening of the structure in government 
drivers were identified that would fast-track the achievement of and especially the link to society. This was done by explicitly 
the SGDs. In the Roadmap SDG 1 No Poverty and SDG 3 Good involving stakeholders (companies, NGOs and representatives 
Health and Wellbeing were explicitly added to Curaçao’s Priority from different social groups) in the review and using their stories 
SDG’s. Curaçao has deliberately chosen to focus on deploying and data in this report. In our ‘spotlights’ you can find the 
its limited human and financial resources where it is needed outcomes of our stakeholder engagement sessions, in which 
most, hence using these six SDGs as means to achieve the other NGOs, private sector and academia were invited to give a two-
11 sustainable goals. With the Roadmap, Curaçao has thus minute-pitch in which they elaborated on their project(s) and 
clearly mapped out the vision for these priority SDGs, which how it contributes to the SDGs. 

73 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
5.2 Human capabilities and 
well-being
Curaçao has taken several steps towards the promotion of 
human well-being and capabilities of its citizens. The focus in 
this area is to ensure equal access to quality education, for our 
citizens must be enabled to take ownership of their lives and live 
together in harmony. Education is also crucial to combat poverty 
in all its forms and increase the resilience of those living in 
poverty and those that are most susceptible to fall into poverty. 
The well-being of our society furthermore entails that our 
citizens have a healthy lifestyle, are protected against health 
risks and live, work and recreate in an environment that promotes 
good health.
Improved education
Figure 5.4: Outcomes for the accelerator improved education.
In Curaçao we see formal and informal education as important 
Figure 5.3: Overview of how the GSDR entry points (left column) are foundations for our society, with a special focus on the 
linked to Curaçao’s local accelerators (middle column) and the SDGs development, social security and well-being of our citizens in 
(right column) general, therefore leading to the broadening of prosperity in 
Curaçao. High quality education is actively being promoted, 
which contributes to active citizenship, broad social participation, 
social inclusion and opportunities for citizens to participate 
actively in the labor market. To achieve this vision the 
Government of Curaçao is working towards achieving five 
outcomes. These outcomes are shown in figure 5.4. 

75 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
Data at a glance
SDG Target 1.2.1 1.5.1 1.5.3 1.5.4 1.a.2 10.1
Official SDG Number of Proportion of total 
indicator deaths, missing government 
persons and spending on 
directly affected essential services 
persons attributed (education, health 
to disasters per and social 
100,000 protection)
population ↓
↑ 27.4 (2018)
0.67 (2010)
Other National Census National disaster Risk profile Gini 0.42
Data Houdseholds risk reduction established and ↓
below poverty line strategies in line special bureau 
↓ with the Sendai dedicated to 
25.1% (2010) Framework for disaster risk 
Disaster Risk management
Reduction ↑
↑
Table 5.2: GOAL 1. End poverty in all its forms everywhere, GOAL 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries
Measures and development since last VNR Furthermore the ministry in charge of labor affairs has formed 
Several policies and related projects have been initiated to partnerships with different NGOs and private companies to 
reduce poverty and to empower vulnerable groups, the youth stimulate the entrepreneurial mindset (self-employment/job 
and families. One such policy is the data driven ‘Curaçao Social creation) among the unemployed, especially the youth. These 
Development Agenda’ (2019), where different projects are included successful pilots like “Youth BIZ Startup” (by Fundashon 
strategically implemented in the three focus areas ‘people’, Negoshi Pikiña) and “Mikro Fiansa” (micro financing by 
‘neighborhood‘ and ‘work’. Based on the concept of Korpodeko). These types of collaborations are set to be 
‘neighborhood development’ Curaçao established the so called continued in the near future.
“Kasnan di bario” (neighborhood houses), which function as 
service points of the relevant ministry and are located in the When it comes to the sense of safety of its citizens and domestic 
different districts of Curaçao. This makes the service more easily violence, Curaçao has prioritized the implementation of the 
accessible and close to the clients. Especially at the height of “Plan Nashonal Kontra Abuzu di Mucha, Violensia Domestiko i 
the COVID-19 pandemic, when there were direct economic Relashonal” (National plan against child abuse and domestic 
consequences on the labor market, this neighborhood approach violence). Four ministries worked together with relevant 
turned out to be extremely valuable and effective. stakeholders of the civil society to emphasize the safety of 
citizens, empowering victims of domestic violence and abuse, 
Remarkably, COVID-19 also marked the beginning of a much- and raising awareness on the consequences of violence and 
needed reform of our welfare system and the labor market. To abuse within the communities. A local Children’s Rights Platform 
this end the government must consult with its social partners on was set up in 2018 to promote collaboration between 
how to effectively prepare workers for available and new jobs governmental and non-governmental organizations working for 
taking the changing dynamics of the local labor market into children. Projects on sexual education, on breaking the cycle of 
account. In close cooperation with the Development Bank a violence, and intensive family counseling services are executed 
project has been started to develop a highly skilled, or are still ongoing. Another initiative in this area was the 
knowledgeable, and motivated labor force that will attract completion and presentation of an assessment report of the 
Direct Foreign Investment in specific sectors of the economy. feasibility to establish a sheltering framework for seriously 

77 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
Measures and development since last VNR with the tools to be able to provide the necessary care for their 
Curaçao implemented various projects and trajectories to reform children. Curaçao also focuses on improving the resilience of our 
the healthcare model and protection of the environment. These youth so that they become reluctant to a life of crime. To achieve 
reforms also include the reform of governance and strategy, this vision the Government of Curaçao is working towards 
organization and management and financial allocation and achieving 5 outcomes. These outcomes are shown in figure 5.7.
incentives. The program “Traha huntu pa un Korsou Salú 2025” 
- Working together for a Healthy Curaçao 2025, introduced a Data at glance
working method based on transparency, communication, 
SDG Target 16.5.1 16.6.1
harnessing the power, future-proof and program funding. When 
Official SDG Proportion of Primary government 
it comes to the prevention of non-communicable diseases, 
indicator persons who had at expenditures as a 
least one contact proportion of 
Curaçao introduced its “National Multisectoral Action Plan for 
with a public official original approved 
the Prevention and Control of Non-Communicable Diseases” and who paid a bribe budget  
to a public official, or →  
(NCD MAP). NCD MAP addresses Curaçao’s four leading NCDs 
were asked for a 27.4% (2018)
bribe by those public  
(i.e. cardiovascular diseases, cancer, diabetes, chronic respiratory 
→  
disease), the five shared risk factors (i.e. tobacco use, the harmful 
0.67 (2010)
use of alcohol, unhealthy diet, physical inactivity and air 
Other National Data
pollution), as well as the underlying determinants. Mental Health 
is an important condition to consider when addressing NCDs Table 5.4: GOAL 16 Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for 
and is covered by a specific plan covering the period 2019-2022. sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build 
More is elaborated in the VLR. effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels
Improve sense of Safety for family & youth Measures and development since last VNR
Curaçao developed a Strategic Policy plan in 2017, focused on 
youth protection and combating and preventing youth crime, 
resocialization, and law enforcement and public order and 
security. Curaçao is merging and allocating a central reporting 
point for its organizations working with minors, youth, and 
victims which will finalize and be fully operational in 2023. 
Reorganizing the legal duties of these organizations improved 
the service delivery to the aforementioned group and improved 
the cooperation between these organizations. 
The organizations working with minors, youth, and victims give 
training or have other activities focused on the group that they 
target. These organizations held different campaigns focused 
on prevention these last 4 years like “Sende Sende”, an 
awareness campaign focusing on alcohol, drugs and sexual 
themes among the youth, and the weekly radio program 
Figure 5.7: Outcomes for the accelerator empowered youth. “Hustisia, Seguridad i Abo”, where issues of the entire judicial 
chain are being discussed. There is furthermore a Restorative 
An improved sense of safety for our families and especially our Justice working group which is performing the awareness 
youth is seen as an integral part of Curaçao in 2030. The focus campaign in schools “Legumai beef, por otro” (“never mind 
in this area is to increase the opportunities and possibilities of quarrel you can choose differently”). Restorative Justice is a 
children and young persons in Curaçao, and to equip families new approach to offender training. This approach has been 

79 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
persons did not request any form of government assistance, coordinated and inter-ministerial policy making (Health in All 
implying that a large number of people are working in the Policies). Taking into account the delicate state of the 
informal sector. Regretfully there is little data available as to the government’s budget these last few years, policy makers must 
degree of informality or the size of the informal sector in (continue to) combine their forces to (re)allocate current financial 
Curaçao. It is nevertheless widely believed that in some specific resources and identify new and innovative financing strategies 
sectors a large group of informal workers is active. This is a to ensure financing of the health goals.
challenge from the point of view of labor market reform. 
The safety of our citizens, especially our youth, is very important. 
Structural promotion of health is needed for Curaçao’s citizens if However, all the organizations in the judiciary chain have the same 
we want to achieve a fundamental behavioral change. This challenge, which is budgetary constraints. Capacity development 
requires major efforts from all concerned and this asks for was also signaled as a challenge for these organizations.
Spotlights
Curaçao’s Autism Aid Therapy Center Curaçao Phoenix Foundation
Autism Aid Foundation started an Early Intensive ABA Therapy Curaçao Phoenix Foundation provides training, coaching and 
Center in Curaçao in 2019, to elevate knowledge of autism in workshops to empower and bring transformation in individuals 
Curaçao for parents, teachers and caregivers and to give through personal development and effective communication 
professional guidance to parents, schools and other organizations. and life skills. Phoenix also aims to reach the community by 
The ability to provide services from an early age and help children observing its needs and developing methods, strategies and 
with Autism become more independent and functioning within activities with the purpose of prevention, using an eclectic, 
the society is extremely important not just for the child and his/ holistic and eye-to-eye approach. Curaçao Phoenix Foundation 
her family, but for society as a whole. Increased independence consists of a team of Senior Trainers, Peer-to-Peer Trainers. 
and functioning, means the child can become a contributing From 2009 until now Phoenix has trained almost yearly in more 
adult, instead of someone who their family and the country have than 25 high schools, more than 10 youth institutions and 
to take care of. Autism Aid Foundation strives to become the foundations and more than 20 youth projects. Phoenix have 
Autism center of Curaçao and the Caribbean. been providing training on “train the trainer” level; training 
teachers, youth educators and sport coaches and also worked 
with juvenile delinquents, poor communities and universities. 
On the other hand, They have trained business teams and 
leaders and certified more than 500 participants in their 
coaching- and training programs.

81 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
stimulate a more sustainable and resilient economic growth is to the participation of Curaçao in the Union programs or non-EDF 
establish a so-called ‘Underwriting fund’ which will address programs for which Curaçao is eligible. Curaçao is also assessing 
collateral issues for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and other sources of funding besides the EU. Through the Central 
attract seed funds. Bank of Curaçao and St. Maarten (CBCS) an inclusive finance 
trajectory has been put in place to ensure everybody has equal 
To improve the business climate on the island, several actions access to the financial infrastructure (bank account) in Curaçao.
have been proposed, in close cooperation with the Government 
of the Netherlands. In addition to red tape reduction and Increase Exports
lowering the cost of doing business, there are several other Curaçao has developed several strategic plans to guide us 
economic reform measures in the Country Package Curaçao towards long term sustainable economic development. Curaçao 
(‘Landspakket’ see section 3.1 and 4.5) that will be implemented developed a Strategic Trade Development Roadmap (STDR) 
in the short and midterm, to make the economy of the island that serves as a guideline for the National Export Strategy (NES). 
more sustainable and resilient. The National Export Strategy will serve as a driver in increasing 
the competitiveness of Curaçao’s companies and also 
Sectoral Growth eliminating red tape for investors, creating a friendlier and 
Curaçao has put promoting SMEs high on its priority list, as a competitive investment climate by lowering the cost of doing 
means to accelerate economic growth and promote economic business. The sectors that are included within the National 
diversification, as well as creating jobs and income earning Export Strategy are ICT, Educational Services, Creative 
opportunities for its citizens. For this purpose, the Government Industries, International Financial Services, Port and Maritime 
developed and approved a SMEs policy. The policy follows Services, and Tourism. Support strategies that will facilitate the 
seven basic principles to promote entrepreneurship and SMEs, transition to sustainable economic growth, are strengthening 
it improves the business environment, designs rules according our data infrastructure and creating better access to information, 
to a “think-small first approach”, makes public administration better positioned trade and investment promotion, and skills 
responsive to SME needs, facilitates SME participation in public and entrepreneurship development. Other sectors not included 
procurement and SME access to finance, promotes skills, and as focus sectors will also benefit from the National Export 
supports SME internationalization. Strategy. Curaçao is also positioning itself as a test bed for new 
technologies (e.g. green, blue and smart technologies), and is 
SMEs in Curaçao are also being supported via an organizational working towards building an innovation sector supported by 
and online platform (www.MiNegosh.org/My Business) with students and start-ups. 
various tools and instruments. “Mi Negoshi’’ is currently fulfilling 
the role of a small business development center. Curaçao has In addition, members of the Word Trade Organization (WTO) 
started an initiative in this framework for the local SMEs to get have agreed in 2020 to establish a working party for the 
access to the incentives provided by Rijksdienst voor accession of Curaçao to the WTO. This will open the opportunity 
Ondernemend Nederland (RVO), and is currently exploring the for the island to directly participate in the global trade dialogue 
possibility of funding the Curaçao Development Institute (CDI) and seek mutual economic progress by connecting to other 
to carry out this task. trading partners, especially in the Caribbean region, based on a 
transparent set of multilateral and plurilateral trading and other 
Government Investments commercial rules, administered on the basis of equality. 
To support the national institutional capacities Curaçao has 
developed the “EU-desk” (European Union Desk). The overall Blue & Circular economy
objective of the EU-Desk Curaçao is to create awareness about Curaçao launched in 2020 a policy guideline of Circular economy 
market access possibilities to the European Union (EU) and to and established the Curaçao Doughnut Economy Task Force 
make more effective use of the availability of EU-funding such as (CDE) and Project Bureau Circular Economy (PCE) to move to a 
non-EDF or Horizontal programs, but also assist and increase sustainable economy with less pollution and sustainable use of 

83 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
5.4 Food systems and nutrition production and consumption rises. This leads again to higher 
patterns import dependency and a weaker competitive position on the 
4
global food market (Walters and Jones, 2006) .
Data at a glance
SDG 2.c 3.4.1 3.4.1 3.4.1 3.4.1
Target
Official Cancer Diabetes Cardio- Chronic 
SDG 2.29 0.31 vascuar respiratory 
indicator (2017) (2017) disease disease 
3.49 0.54 (2017)
(2017)
Other 
National 
Data
Table 6: GOAL 2 End hunger, achieve food security and improved 
nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture, GOAL 3 Ensure healthy 
lives and promote well-being for all at all ages
Figure 5.9: Outcomes for the accelerator environmental sustainability. Measures and Progress/developments since last VNR
The topic of “Food systems” is part of the environmental awareness The emergence of local producers that cultivate organically or 
outcome. use permaculture has notably increased during the COVID -19 
pandemic, which fostered community-based networks 
The Government of Curaçao is working towards achieving five supporting urban farming. Domestic fishing is part of Curaçao’s 
outcomes to achieve environmental sustainability. These heritage, and local fisheries are still present in small amounts. 
outcomes are shown in figure 5.9. The topic of food systems is Strong initiatives nationwide to increase food systems resilience, 
part of the environmental awareness outcome. promote local production, purchasing, and consumption, as 
well as contribute to workforce development and a renewed 
According to data from CBS-Curaçao, 65.9% of adults are connection to land, culture, and community still prevail.
overweight or have obesities. Further, adult obesity accounts for 
2
29.4% of the local population. The sugar intake is about 48% Curaçao has established an agricultural policy 2013 - 2018. This 
among youngsters between 18 and 24 years old who take soft policy was renewed in 2018, and focuses on replacing imported 
3 5
drinks almost daily. Curaçao’s nutrition transition of the last 50 food by locally produced food with an estimate of 5% each 
years, as a result of the ‘westernization’ of diets, is caused by year establishing whilst implementing a phytosanitary 
both the consumers themselves and the actors that control what legislation, and strengthening the service at the Executive 
they consume through the food supplied by import. The Department of the Agriculture and Husbandry.
nutrition intake seems to have changed to increased high-fat 
foods and sweeteners and a decline in cereals and vegetable There is a serious local food production in Curaçao. The Hidden 
fibers. Combined with the low activity lifestyles of the majority Green Movement is a photo documentary about the local food 
of the population of Curaçao, these changes are associated with production in Curaçao. Its aim is to bring the farmer closer to 
rising rates of overweight (obesity) and diet-related chronic the consumer by sharing knowledge and raising more awareness 
diseases (Hawkes, 2006; CARICOM, 2010). Western-oriented about local food. The Hidden Green Movement shines a light 
foods are higher in demand, and the gap between domestic on the work and life of different farmers (kunukero’s). The project 
2 Volksgezondheid Instituut Curacao, 2017 https://koninkrijk. 4 Food Security on Curaçao: An Interdisciplinary Food Systems Approach 
nu/2021/06/04/import-en-export-curacao-fors-gedaald/ on Vulnerability and the Impact of Tourism. (2018).
3 Volksgezondheid Instituut Curacao, 2017 5 Agriculture, livestock and ﬁshery products

85 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
Urban Farming in Seri’ Otrobanda
5.5 Energy decarbonization with 
universal access
Hòfinan Ser’i Otrobanda is an assembly of various urban 
community gardens (hòfi) in the neighborhood of Ser’i Otrobanda 
in Curacao. The organization started with almost no resources. 
They plant healthy and affordable vegetables and fruit for the 
neighbors within the neighborhood that were struggling during 
the pandemic. These gardens have provided in the basic need of 
healthy food, handing out over 700 harvest packages, with the 
trickle down effect of social cohesiveness and sense of belonging, 
while creating training and job opportunities for all ages and a 
small scale neighborhood economy where excess produce is 
being sold to hotels in the neighborhood and people outside the 
neighborhood to create a revenue stream that is again invested 
in the maintenance of the garden and its keepers.  
https://www.facebook.com/seriotrobandacuracao/
Dushi Challenge Kòrsou
Figure 5.10 a and b: Energy decarbonization is part of the 
environmental sustainability accelerator and is related to “renewable 
energy and sustainable energy use” outcome. It is also related to 
climate action and specifically “reduced carbon footprint”
Dushi Challenge Kòrsou encouraged the community of Curaçao 
to grow their own sweet potatoes.  Dushi Challenge Korsou 
Curaçao is working on its energy transition through the 
organized the distribution of sweet potato cuttings together with 
implementation of the National Energy Policy. This policy was 
a group of volunteers among residents of Curacao. Through 
developed in close collaboration with stakeholders. The topic of 
social media, the community received information from Dushi 
Challenge Korsou on how to grow and care for their sweet potato 
energy decarbonization is part of the “renewable energy and 
plant in order for it to produce as many delicious sweet potatoes 
sustainable energy use” outcome, shown in figure 5.10. Wind, 
as possible. Dushi Challenge Korsou does not only aim to 
solar, blue energy, alternative sustainable fuels such as biofuels, 
improve the issue of food security in Curacao, step by step, they 
hydrogen and LNG/CNG and other sources such as waste to 
also want to make the community more aware of where our food 
comes from, and most importantly that growing your own food 
value are the areas on which Curaçao will be focusing. Further 
can be easy and fun! The team behind Dushi Challenge Korsou 
attention will also be given to energy efficiency and the demand 
might initiate future challenges to encourage people to plant 
side management.
more different fruits and vegetables at home. https://www.
facebook.com/DushiChallenge.

87 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
Furthermore, we have seen an increased interest in the use of 5.6 Urban and peri-urban 
OWAC and SWAC technology by many local hotels and other developments
Caribbean islands. Our local companies can hence export this 
technology and increase their revenue.
Challenges and solutions
Curaçao held a Go-Program workshop to identify the areas that 
need attention within the energy transition. The demand side 
and awareness aspects still need to be addressed, while the 
enabling environment requires attention. Other challenges 
encountered in the implementation of the energy transition are 
human resources to push forward this transition and the 
necessary financial resources to finance this transition.
Spotlights
Green University
Figure 5.11: Outcomes related to the accelerator sustainable cities and 
communities.
The University of Curaçao (UoC) wants to become more 
Urban and peri-urban developments in Curaçao encompass the 
environmentally friendly in the coming years. The UoC is 
efforts being made to transform urban Curaçao while maintaining 
committed to investing in sustainable energy facilities and 
its authentic and cultural characteristics that made Willemstad a 
cost-saving measures in the fields of energy use, water, and 
communication, both for educational purposes and for general 
World heritage site for 25 years, this year. The communities in 
business operations to reduce costs. We have initiatives on 
Curaçao and the inner city should experience an increased 
energy efficiency, and renewable energy (Green Lab), waste, 
livability that fulfills their needs and positively impacts their life, 
and awareness and education programs. In the academic year 
while the built environment is more resilient to the impacts of 
2023 - 2024 the Faculty of Engineering will introduce a new 
study program, Bachelor of Science in Sustainable Technology 
climate change. To achieve this vision the Government of 
and Engineering.
Curacao is working towards achieving 6 outcomes. These 
The university strives to contribute to the sustainable 
outcomes are shown in figure 5.11. 
development of the society by training future professionals with 
sufficient sustainable and modern technological knowledge and 
skills.

89 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
Collaboration with science and academia Spotlights 
The Government of Curaçao developed an Evidence-based 
Management Plan Klein Curaçao
Infrastructure tool (EBI) together with the University of Oxford 
and the United Nations Office for Project Services. This tool 
shows the linkages between infrastructure development in 
different sectors (water, energy, solid waste and waste water) 
and can aid in identifying the vulnerable infrastructures when it 
comes to hazards, as well as the impact of growth in one sector 
on the other sectors.
Successes
Curaçao has been rather successful in forming international and 
The Government of Curaçao is implementing a management 
local partnerships when it comes to moving the urban and peri-
plan for its key “ Klein Curaçao. This Key is very popular among 
urban developments. Partnerships like the collaboration with 
visitors and locals for recreational purposes and is frequently 
the UNOPS, the University of Oxford and our Local University of 
visited by a large number of persons. This management plan 
will focus on the preservation of the biodiversity on this key and 
Curaçao, have led to access to knowledge as well as renowned 
counteract the challenges faced due to illegal occupation and 
international and national expertise being available. A small 
access to certain parts of this key, as well as retrofitting the light 
victory that has been furthermore achieved in terms of 
tower on this key that has the designation of a monument, and 
accessibility and leaving no one behind is the concept of shared 
hence is a colonial heritage.
streets and incorporation of areas where disabled persons are 
better able to traffic in the downtown area in their wheelchairs. 
Kaya Kaya street party
Challenges and solutions
Organizational challenges leading to stagnation of the 
implementation and hence hamper the achievement of the 
localized goals are the lack of human resources to push forward 
policy development, interventions and actions in this area, the 
lack of financial resources to finance the implementation, 
political sensitivity of policy themes and oftentimes a slow 
decision-making process. 
Curaçao also faces different challenges in finding suitable 
This initiative works on community building by uniting the 
solutions for the user rights and accessibility to our coasts for all, 
bario, cultivating street culture and improving the image & 
making Curaçao more accessible for disabled persons by 
environmental awareness. Ser’i Otrobanda is a part of the inner 
providing access to government buildings, buildings in general 
city that has been severely affected by decline and a sense of 
insecurity. During the preparation phase of the festival, the 
and other locations, and finding suitable solutions for affordable 
residents, students from the Faculty of Technical Sciences of the 
housing, and illegal occupation of land.
University of Curaçao, and the foundation members renovate 
and beautify the area where the festival will be held with street 
Curaçao hopes to find countries that are working on similar 
art and social architectural interventions to enhance the cultural 
identity of the area and make it more livable. When finished the 
issues through the Island local 2030 hub to create a support 
festival will be held, bringing people from outside the 
base for donor funds and hence also solve the financial 
community who come to dance, eat and have a good time, 
challenges.
while immersing themselves in culture and arts and contributing 
to the neighborhood economy.

91 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
Measures and development since last VNR
Sustainable Waste Management
SDG Target 11.6.1 12.4 12.5
Official SDG indicator
Other National Data Proportion of municipal solid Hazardous waste treatment  Tons of material recycled  
waste collected and managed in not available  ↑  
controlled facilities  → 61.854 (2021)
↓  
187.244 (2021)
Table 5.9: GOAL 11 Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable, GOALS 12 Ensure sustainable consumption and 
production patterns
At this present time, the waste disposal on Curaçao, has since is presently deriving little value from waste. Therefore, the 
increased, and it is projected that Curaçao’s now only legal Government of Curaçao is aiming to reach a circular economy 
landfill (Malpais) for solid waste disposal, will reach its maximum as indicated above. Curaçao is currently in an early stage of this 
capacity within the next 10 to 15 years. In Curaçao, almost all development and with a proposed project called ‘’From waste 
solid waste is landfilled, only a small part is still recycled. to value’’ will be able to make a clear step forward within the 
Currently, approximately 170,000 tons/year of solid waste are outlined strategy. Nationally, it can be concluded that the 
generated in Curaçao. Most of this solid waste is disposed of in collected municipal solid waste managed and controlled has 
the Malpais Landfill, and is managed by Selikor NV, a increased. The amount of total waste collected per capita per 
government-owned waste management company. A smaller day is 3.3 kg. For the year 2020, this is almost 1200 kg/capita, 
amount of solid waste is dumped illegally at different spots on which is very high, and three times compared to the amount in 
10
the island. On a small island such as Curaçao, where land is Latin America and the Caribbean . The recycling rate seems to 
limited, long-term reliance on landfilling as a disposal method have increased. 
for solid wastes is unsustainable. With regards to this, Curaçao 
Sustainable Water Management and Wastewater
SDG Target 6.1.1 6.3.1 6.4.2 6.5.1 6.6.1
Official SDG indicator
Other National Data Percentage of Portion of wastewater Number of Degree of IWRM Percentage of 
households flows safely treated  households with wells implementation  Wetland area 
connected to the ↑  ↓  based on UNEP nominated as Ramsar 
distribution net  16% (2017) 8,9% (2011) survey  area under the 
↑  ↓  RAMSAR convention 
98,8% (2011) 32% (2017) → 
62.1% (2021)
Table 5.10: GOAL 6 Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all 
10 Curaçao-Environmental-Statistics-Compendium-2020. (2022). The Central 
Bureau of Statistics (CBS) of Curaçao. https://www.cbs.cw/curacao-
environmental-compendium-statistics-2020 -page 48 - Data from 2020

93 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
Successes also that this also resulted in an approved Management Plan for 
Klein Curaçao, which presented strategies to protect the site’s 
Sustainable Ocean Management natural resources while allowing the sustainable use of this area 
for visitors and local residents of Curaçao.
SDG Target 14.5.1 14.a.1 14.c.1
Official SDG 
Challenges and solutions
indicator
The protection of terrestrial species, as signaled during our rapid 
Other National Percentage of Research United Nations 
Data coastal and reports Convention on 
integrated assessment of the alignment with the SDGs, still needs 
marine areas conducted in the Law of the 
conserved the Blue Halo Sea Ratified  improvement. The Nature Policy Plan will serve as a guiding policy 
through Program  →
document to establish the strategies and targets to strengthen 
national and →  
international 6 (2021)
the protection of terrestrial and underwater species. Building on 
law  
this legacy of stewardship and natural resource management for 
↑  
13,8% (2020)
the underwater species, Curaçao has ambitious 2030 goals to 
Table 5.12: GOAL 14 Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas protect 30% of proprietary waters, to establish marine-offshore 
and marine resources for sustainable development sanctuary and fish reproduction zones as marine management 
areas. Another noticeable aspect that requires improvement is the 
In February 2015, the Government of Curaçao and the Waitt estimation of the magnitude of all types of pollution, for instance, 
Institute signed a Memorandum of Understanding that launched the volumes of discharged sewage, soil pollution, etc. Particular 
the Blue Halo Curaçao program, which is a comprehensive attention needs to be paid to safely treat unusable and hazardous 
ocean and coastal management project to develop and wastes. The legislation program, which is underway, is extensively 
implement solutions for sustainable ocean management. The elaborated in the VLR.
Blue Halo Curaçao focuses on creating policy in a 5-year period 
on marine spatial planning, sanctuary zones, and fisheries Spotlights 
regulations. Through this partnership, Curaçao established the 
Climate Change Sint Willibrordus
inter-ministerial “Blue Ribbon Committee” (2017) and adopted 
the policy plan “Recommendations for a Sustainable Ocean 
Policy” (2018). An Addendum to the initial Memorandum of 
Understanding, signed in October 2018, set out to protect 30% 
of Curaçao’s waters through near-shore and offshore marine 
sanctuaries, necessary regulatory frameworks, and new fisheries 
laws. The policy is based on scientific, social, and economic 
data, and engages stakeholders and the people of Curaçao. 
The Blue Halo Program mainly focuses on the ecological part of 
this policy domain. Through this partnership, extensive research, 
EU-Proposal* to introduce eduScrum via a virtual exchange 
planning, and legal development has been reached to establish 
approach as didactical agile methodology in the field of 
Marine Protected Areas (MPAs), resulting in the nomination of 
education in combination with climate change content. Local 
Klein Curaçao as a Ramsar Wetland of International Importance partnership will be made with youth organization GreenKidz. 
Small projects with community involvement on tourism and 
in July 2018, approval and legal establishment of Curaçao’s 
climate change in the projected Midden Curaçao Biosphere 
Underwater Park in September 2018 by the Council of Ministers 
Reserve be through UNESCO’s Man and Biosphere Program.
after more than thirty years, approval of a network of six 
nearshore Fish Reproductive Zones in 2019 and the notitia to * Germany, Spain, Russia, Czech Republic, Portugal, South Africa
create an offshore marine sanctuary. It is noteworthy to mention 

95 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
 Sint Maarten
6
6.1 Development context remained the sole authority of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. 
Sint Maarten is a Small Island Developing State (SIDS) located in Though the new constitutional status allowed for self-
the Leeward Islands Group in the northeast Caribbean Sea. Sint determination within diverse areas, it is not without significant 
Maarten shares its Northern border with the French overseas challenges. As part of the Kingdom,  international funding 
collectivity of Saint Martin, and these uniquely make up the possibilities are limited. As a result, Sint Maarten is often 
smallest landmass in the world (Sint Maarten: 34 km² and Saint- overlooked and disadvantaged by potential international 
Martin 54.4 km²). There are no physical borders, and people are investors/ funding organizations.
free to move between both sides of the islands.
Impact of Hurricanes Irma and Maria 
In September 2017, Sint Maarten was struck by hurricanes Irma 
and Maria. The cumulative damage of the two hurricanes was 
estimated as close to 17.9 percent of the Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) on the Dutch side. The airport, bridges, houses, 
public buildings, hotels, businesses, and roads sustained 
significant damage. Sint Maarten’s economy is heavily 
dependent on tourism, so the damage sustained threatened 
the industry’s recovery.
Real GDP Growth (%)  Per annum
20
15
15
10.5
10
3.4
5
0.3
0
-5
-7.1
-10
Figure 6.1: map of Sint Maarten illustrating the division between the 
-9.4
-15
Dutch and French side of the island. 
-17.9
-20
2016* 2017* 2018* 2019* 2020* 2021* 2022*
Sint Maarten is well known for having one of the busiest modern 
Note: *ammounts are forecasted and not actuals
international airports and the largest cruise terminals in the 
Source: Department of Statistics, Department of ETT, Central Bank of 
Curacao & St. Maarten
Caribbean. Both ports are located on the Dutch side of the 
island and serve as a gateway to Europe, the United States and Figure 6.2
the movement of people and goods to the Leeward Islands. 
However, Sint Maarten is particularly susceptible to external According to the National Recovery Resilience Plan (NRRP, 
shocks such as climate-related disasters (hurricanes), intensified 2018), the estimated damages and losses caused by the 2017 
by the effects of global climate change. hurricanes amounted to $2.7 billion ($1.4 billion and $1.3 billion, 
respectively). The ECLAC DaLa report (2018) of hurricane Irma, 
With the change in its constitutional status on October 10, 2010, mirrored by the NRRP, highlighted priority areas for recovery 
Sint Maarten became an autonomous country within the and reconstruction, such as education and infrastructure. In the 
Kingdom of the Netherlands. This new constitutional status immediate response and recovery process, emergency relief 
signifies administrative changes in governing the affairs of the and assistance were considered vital. 
country. Sint Maarten transitioned (or progressed) to a self-
governing country within the Kingdom for all internal matters In 2018, the National Recovery Program Bureau (NRPB) was 
with the exception of Defence and Foreign Affairs, which established. The NRPB became responsible for the preparation, 

97 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
working by establishing inter-ministerial platforms for policy 
development, management, monitoring, and decision-making. 
Internally the participation and collaboration have been 
enhanced across ministries. This manner of working has been 
established to improve interlinkages and create shared 
ownership as it relates to program and/or project development, 
policy coherence, efficiency, and effectiveness. 
Despite financial and capacity constraints, great collaboration 
with key stakeholders such as the Sint Maarten Development 
Fund (SMDF), the National Recovery Program Bureau (NRPB), as 
well as access to funding and technical assistance via the 
Netherlands, the United Nations the European Union (Resembid) 
and other funding agencies, make significant achievements still 
possible.
Building a Nation while Leaving No One Behind
In addressing the pledge to “leave no one behind, build as a 
nation, become resilient and self-reliant”, Sint Maarten opted 
for an all-inclusive process leading towards a sustainable future 
and to be better equipped to respond to a crisis. Based on a 
baseline report outlining Sint Maarten’s challenges and focus on 
development, a two-phased approach was taken toward 
sustainable development:
1. To formulate a broadly shared vision for the country by means 
of an all-inclusive national dialogue, which in turn;
2. Provides the foundation and guide towards the development 
of a national plan.
NRPB
The objectives for this approach: 
Challenges SDG implementation • A National Development Vision and Plan will analyze Sint 
Recurring disasters like hurricanes challenge the implementation Maarten’s objectives and priorities in relation to its sectors in 
of the SDG’s. It is challenging to allocate limited available response to well-identified national needs. It will propose 
resources towards sustainable development and planning. and justify an overall plan in which everyone’s role can be 
Furthermore, it is not possible to apply for Official Development seen in context.
Assistance because Sint Maarten is considered a “high-income • A well-researched and reasoned policy document is of 
country” because of its relatively high GDP per Capita. immense value to Sint Maarten in allocating its scarce 
resources. It references the scope and timetable of projects 
In addition, Sint Maarten is facing capacity issues and challenges to the resources available as well as the benefits, which will 
in effectively organizing institutions to ensure an integrated accrue. It enables realistic and achievable decisions to be 
implementation of the s. The interlinkages between SDGs and made.
policy interdependencies challenge the government • The private sector needs a stable and sympathetic 
organization and decision-making processes. Therefore, the environment to invest securely and profitably. A national plan 
government of Sint Maarten strengthened an integral way of provides the evidence to make positive decisions.

99 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
6.2 National Development Theme A: SDG 1 and 2 Poverty and Hunger
A compassionate and united Although Sint Maarten’s critical data is absent to determine the 
Sint Maarten extent of poverty issues, the 2017 and 2020 disasters have 
exposed the existence of pockets of poverty on the island. As a 
SDGs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10 direct response to vulnerable groups, several NGOs and the 
Government of Sint Maarten distributed food packages during 
Introduction and after the hurricanes and COVID pandemic lockdown for 
Sint Maarten’s demographic profile indicates an aging population, support. These vulnerable groups have been identified after the 
high youth unemployment, relatively low labour productivity, and disasters as follows: 
limited access to skilled work opportunities. Existing social • Unemployed and underemployed, especially youth;
protection frameworks require reform to become sustainable and • Single-parent households, especially single female-headed 
eliminate fiscal risk. Especially health insurance needs greater households;
coverage. Social housing is under pressure to provide affordable • The elderly;
accommodation for low and middle-income earners. The • People living with disabilities/ special needs groups;
education system needs to adapt to modern technology and • Victims of gender-based violence, domestic violence, and 
teaching methods and courses more aligned with future market abuse;
needs. Core government institutions, notably justice and • People with various forms of addiction;
education, require substantial investment in human resource • Undocumented migrants and refugees.
development and infrastructure. Youth development is an 
overarching development issue. Overall, accurate social and The resilience of vulnerable groups to cope with disasters is low 
human development statistical information in critical areas such due to their lack of financial buffers and social safety nets. To 
as population, defining poverty, and identifying wealth distribution reduce the effect that these disasters have on children, and the 
is lacking, resulting in misinformation and poor strategic planning. youth, a school food program was introduced, which has been 
Sint Maarten Population  Per annum
running since 2017. Around 4,000 primary school children are 
provided with one or two meals a day (breakfast and lunch), 
served at schools and free of charge. 
Several stakeholders in Sint Maarten support this public-private 
partnership program. With food demand being generally more 
significant than supply in times of a disaster, the actual challenge 
lies in logistics development in the food aid supply chain 
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
network. With issues pertaining to capacity and limited 
Note: The Population Census was last conducted in April 2011. The tables 
resources, the government is working on a more sustainable 
below provide an estimate of population numbers as per 2014 to 2021.
plan. The latter further ties into having a robust agriculture 
Source: Department of Statistics, The Department of Cicil Registry.
Vital Statistics Jan 2014 Jan 2015 Jan 2016 Jan 2017 Jan 2018 Jan 2019 Jan 2020 Jan 2021
Population (estimates) 37,132 38,247 39,411 40,535 40,614 41,177 42,044 42,577
Births 532 500 458 363 412 398 423
Deaths 169 197 160 172 165 194 233
Natural Increase 363 303 298 191 247 204 190
Immigrants 1,575 1,541 1,648 964 1,273 1,379 868
Emigrants 824 681 822 1,078 957 716 525
Net migration 751 860 826 -114 316 663 343
Total Growth 1,115 1,164 1,125 79 563 867 533
Figure 6.5
33,622
33,249
36,090
37,132
38,247
39,411
40,535
40,614
41,177
42,044
42,577

101 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
SDG 5 and 10 Gender Equality and Reduced 
inequalities 
The government of Sint Maarten is currently doing a peer-review 
on statistics. Absent in the ministry’s strategic planning are 
indicators like, for instance, Gender. In the near future, the 
strategic policy will reflect different indicators to safeguard and, 
if necessary, improve the status of vulnerable groups such as the 
elderly, women, and girls by taking into account not only the 
differential roles but also the relationship and balance between 
groups and the institutional structures that support them. 
Photo 6: School children St. Dominics school Achievements and prioritized activities:
st
• 1 quarter 2022 Peer review statistical department to improve 
To make the different policies regarding education coherent results- and evidence-based decision-making, transparency, 
and improve the quality of education, Sint Maarten has started and reporting;
reviewing the education system. In April 2021, the education 
system was screened based on research questions related to 
the core functions of education: qualification, socialization and 
allocation, and the conditions to enable these core functions. 
Desk research was conducted, discussions (on location) were 
held with stakeholders and policymakers, and schools were 
visited to interview school boards, teachers, and pupils/students 
were observed during lessons. An interim report was delivered 
in the first quarter of 2022. The final report, with recommendations 
on improving the basic quality of education, the connection 
between education and the labor market, and the flow between 
education systems between Sint Maarten and the Netherlands, 
is expected in September 2022.

103 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
Therefore, the economy of Sint Maarten is required to be solid The type of applicants were sole proprietors, public 
and diversified to provide a broad range of services and transportation (taxis and bus operators), and public vendors.
employment opportunities and become resilient against 
external shocks. Fiscal reform, labour market reforms, Structural Protection of vulnerable groups:
investments in social safety nets, as well as investments in the To provide the people in Sint Maarten with more capacity for 
tourism sector and other sectors, are essential for a more robust, resilience after economic shock when affected by the serious 
and resilient economy.  However, economic growth should not economic downturn, Sint Maarten is currently working towards 
have a negative impact on Sint Maarten’s environment. Sint an unemployment fund and Social Registry. The project aimed 
Maarten has, therefore, also prioritized a transfer to renewable to provide Sint Maarten with a social security system that has 
energy resources and lowering forms of pollution. appropriate incentives for employment (activation function) and 
an adequate social safety net. 
Economic desired outcome by 2024
SDGs 1, 8 and 11 
INTRO: financial control. Social safety nets and Labour reforms
Higher exports of Improved Higher economic Increased public 
goods & services investment growth rate revenues from Achievements and prioritized activities:
climate economic 
• Research has been conducted on the social security system 
activities
to develop and implement concrete policy recommendations 
for the short and long term. This project will be viewed in 
combination with a reform of the labour market and 
Better business Lower cost of Higher Improved capacity 
support & doing business/ employment & professional 
implementing an Integrated Social Registry System. 
targeted ﬁnancing cost of living level skills
• A tax reform program started in 2021 with the objective to 
The Ministry of Tourism, Economic Affairs, Transportation and Telecommunication
create a robust system that contributes to a (more) fair 
Figure 6.8 distribution of income, stimulating the economy and 
enhancing the controllability of tax authorities.
Direct response after Covid-19 Pandemic • For the Labour market reform, an integrated analysis of the 
In a direct response to the Covid-19 pandemic, the government current labour market policy, legislation, and regulations will 
took quick action and implemented financial support measures be conducted in 2022. This analysis will serve to update and 
to reduce the impact on vulnerable groups and households. modernize the labour market policy. The research will look at 
With no formal unemployment insurance and only limited social the conditions of employment and unemployment. 
assistance and anti-poverty measures, a scenario model was 
used to define the impact of Covid-19 on Sint Maarten’s SDGs 7, 8 and 13
unemployment. This model projected unemployment at 5000 
persons within three months. To avoid this, the government Economic growth, building resilience while 
provided income- and unemployment support. ANG 1150 was protecting the environment 
disbursed to persons who became unemployed due to COVID- Sint Maarten’s focus is to diversify its economy. Still, it will also 
19 to reduce mass lay-offs. continue to further develop its tourism product by promoting 
sustainable tourism to create jobs and to promote local cultural 
and art products (‘Made in SXM’), a shared cultural identity, 
2021 Income support Unemployment 
support
diversity, and tolerance. The positive results of Sint Maarten’s 
Amount applications 638 applied  –  938 applied –  
promotion efforts are noticeable in the 2021 Tourism Statistics:
583 received 683 received
Table 6.1

105 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
• Economic upgrading will be combined with social upgrading in Sint Maarten, to stimulate investments that are essential to 
for sustainability – a social security system is being developed. diversify the economy. Recommendations are implemented 
• In 2021, research was conducted on the investment climate from 2022.
Economic Licenses Issued - 2021 per quarter
120
104104
101
100
78
80
68
57
60
52
50
40
33
27
22
18
1616 16 17
16 16
20 15
14 14
13
12
9
6
5 5
3
2 2 3
2
1 1 1 1 1 1 1
0 0 0 0 0
0
NV's BV's Dir. Licenses Sole Local Foreign Adress Adress Adress Name Purpose 
proprietor- branches branches change comp. change dir. change changes amendments
ships branches
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Note: Total includes request for cancellations, excludes Directors (local residency & Director (foreign residency))
Source: Department of Economic Licenses
Figure 6.10 
Economic Licenses Requests Received - 2021 per quarter
80
75
70
70
61
58
58
60 57 57
54
52
51
50
49 49
50 47
46
45
42
38
40
37
33
28
30 27
26 26
23 23
19
20
12
10
5
2 2 2
1 1
0
0
0
NV's BV's Sole Local Foreign Directors Directors Amendments Cancellations 
proprietorships branches branches (local residency) (foreign (address comp, (comanies & 
residency) directors, name directors)
and purpose)
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Note: Total includes request for cancellations, excludes Directors (local residency & Director (foreign residency))
Source: Department of Economic Licenses
Figure 6.11

107 KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS - VNR 2022
Achievements and prioritized activities:
• A draft Climate Change Report supported by Nature Policy 
Plan Sint Maarten 2021-2025.
• Disaster Risk Management Strategy that consists of a disaster 
risk financing structure, a Centre of Excellence, Disaster Risk 
Vision, and updated laws and policies.
• Disaster risk management policy and shared Vision.
• Sustainable Solid Waste Management Strategy: Reduce, 
reuse, recycle, recover energy and dispose of residual waste. 
• In 2021 the law on the ban of single-use plastic bags was 
passed. Photo 8: Police force
• Working towards a Spatial Development Strategy that aims 
to provide an overview of the bigger picture regarding spatial 
development and the correlation between the country’s 
economic, environmental, and social development for the 
next ten years. The Strategy focuses on sustainable 
development by enhancing the resilience of the country’s 
resilience, protecting our environment and natural resources, 
and enhancing the quality of life for citizens. This will form 
the base for more concrete legislation and policies.
SDG 16 Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions
Sint Maarten is focused on strengthening her institutions by 
improving their effectiveness, efficiency, and quality. Progress 
had been made in the police force and Court of Guardianship. 
Furthermore, the region’s police forces have established good 
working relations, and several cross-border agreements are in 
place. The National Security Strategy addresses issues relating 
to immigration, border protection, and the prevention of 
human, drugs, and arms trafficking. 
The country is currently improving its governance and promoting 
public accountability. 
Achievements and prioritized activities:
• The government has strengthened the integral collaboration 
and structures to operationalize and effected government 
through improved coordination and communication.
• The government is improving its statistics to strengthen 
governments’ capacities and capabilities to work effectively 
as a stable, accountable and transparent system. Photo 9: Courthouse
• Results-based management has been introduced, with a 
monitoring and evaluation system.
• An E-government system is being built. Financial processes 
and services are being enhanced through ICT to provide 
efficient public services to citizens and empower the public.

